in the midst of my thesis i have become frustrated and have
been searching for a better way to do scholarship. one that
opens up the humanities, from being focused on a canon, from
providing little new theory and being scholarship for the sake
of scholarship, from being distributed in the same inaccessible
mediums,

I want a humanities for everybody, a humanities for the public
instead of a humanities limited by the all of the walls in the
ivory tower. In the process, in the theory, in the methods, in
the sources, in the conclusions -- all of these should point
outwards. The arbitrary divisions that structure each of them
have to be torn down. We need to open up the humanities.

These are some reflections on how I am doing this project in
this pursuit. In this project, they have boiled down so far to
four claims:

1. Accessible tools
2. Accessible products
3. Accessible processes
4. Accessible presentations

Or to state it in a single sentence, _we should open up the
humanities_.

### we should document the process

Theoretically: Writing a history is itself a historical event.
When I'm writing about the IMF and the Asian financial crisis,
what is relevant are not the events of 1997, but also the
thoughts and notes I am writing right now in 2021. The
historian is very much implicated in the process of creating
history, because history is not only those that "do the events"
but also the ones that make these events knowable and known to
others.

This is a statement every historian and scholar in the
humanties can agree with, but still the process of writing
history is not one that in my view is treated as a history. We
should be creating and documenting archives while we write. We
should be reflecting, self-critiquing, tracking.

Morally: Writing a history right now occurs by one person one
their computer, typing away on microsoft word. The process of
writing history is locked in the ivory tower, to only those
academicians and putting these characters on the page. It's
impossible to see the development of research from outside
this. We need the documentation of the process as it happens
right now.

Conclusion: we should document, journal, log our own processes
and how they come to be; and through all of this make it freely
accessible and

### we should use freely accessible resources to make research

### we should make our resources freely accessible

### we should use more accessible mediums of presentation

We have coalesced to a defined canon of presentation as well
