# Intro

Hi everyone! My name's Nathan, and I'm a senior at Yale College
double majoring in Ethnicity, Race, & Migration and Statistics
& Data Science. Today I'll be presenting work from my senior
thesis, titled _The IMF and Global Dispossession_. A version of
this project was originally begun in Professor Gary Okihiro's
_Fruits of Empire_, and the thesis itself was completed with
the guidance of Professor Lowe. So a quick shout out to them --
much of the "meat," or argument, or punch would not have been
created without their insight; if they're in.

Okay, so, my thesis. My thesis is about the 1997 Asian
financial crisis, and the steps the International Monetary Fund
took to "rescue" the region. My goal with the thesis is to
explore the logic and orientation of the IMF as not an
objectively beneficial or simply an economic project, but as a
deeply insidious one to advance the goals of empires past and
present, and promote a world order where white, modern, Western
nations are privileged as creditor nations to nonwhite nations
including those that were hit during the Asian financial
crisis. But all of those intentions are masked partly through
institutional structure and history, and in even larger part
because of the universalizing, colorblind, objective, economic,
discourse of capitalist success and the road to modernity.

That's how empire operates today -- often, rather than stating
that one race is biologically deficient as eugenicists of
colonial regimes might have said a century prior, the same
sorts of claims of inherent deficiency are made through
economic and objective discourse. The same sorts of claims are
made and reified through investment banks and bodies like the
IMF that both lift some nations up through waves of investment
and push them down during crises through a mixture of
unreasonable interest rates and disciplinary policies. These
practices are informed by a presumption of racial difference,
but they in turn create those presumptions of racial difference
by casting them as of financial capability or deficiency.

# this presentation

So this presentation will proceed in four parts. First, just to
make sense of everything, I'll discuss a little bit about what
the IMF actually is and how it has come to be that way. Second,
I'll discuss the events of the Asian financial crisis and how
it made its way to Korea. Third, I'll discuss the IMF
intervention. Finally, I'll discuss the sort of racial logic
this crisis and intervention builds upon and reinforces, namely
that of Asian nations like Korea as forever "adjacent" to but
always outside of modernity, and used as a sort of peg or
marker to denigrate other nonwhite nations. This depiction,
which I'll refer to as the "model modernity" narrative,
parallels the racialization of Asian immigrants in the US and
elsewhere through (for example) the "model minority" myth that
similarly places Asian immigrants adjacent to but forever
aberrant to whiteness and capitalist success.

# What is the IMF?

To avoid confusing anyone any further, I should explain what
the IMF actually is. The IMF, or the International Monetary
Fund, gives loans to countries during times of crisis. It has
about $940 billion, so it's pretty rich. But during crises, and
especially big crises, it's hesitant to give out all of this
money and leave themselves with nothing, so the IMF turns
towards investment banks in creditor countries and gets them to
give or renew loans. Partly becuase it needs to attract and
satisfy these banks, partly because it wants to (quote unquote)
ensure repayment of these loans by building up countries'
economies towards a budget surplus

It also requires these policies for insidious reasons like
fulfilling the economic needs of the Global North. One example
of this is that it often pushes Third World countries towards
the exports of raw materials to the global north, at face value
just because these are stable and in-demand industries, but in
reality recapitulating old colonial relations. By imposing
these kinds of policies during times of crises when countries
are sort of most vulnerable, it serves as a regressive
reorganizing force to push third world countries to serve the
needs of first world countries.

# The Asian Financial Crisis

An example of such a crisis, and the main moment I discuss in
my thesis, came in 1997 with the asian financial crisis.

The buildup of the crisis itself came from sort of exploitative
and extractive relationships between Asia and the Global North,
mediated by a currency system that was born alongside the IMF.

Banks in America thought that investments and loans to Asia
were safe, and guaranteed by governments to not fail, and would
often roll over loans for more time when it did appear that
companies couldn't pay. This led to hundreds of billions of
dollars in debt piling high, with often more loans being made
being pulled in to cover the end of one loan, and so on.

This went on continuously since the 1980s, but it became
especially problematic after US fed chair alan greenspan raised
interest rates and tried to boost the US dollar in the
mid-1990s, which in turn made Asian exports comparatively less
attractive and made several more companies fail.

Some companies began making arrangements taht pushed Asian
economies to fall so that they could profit from it; George
Soros' Quantun Fund took out $1 billion agains the Thai baht,
and Julia Robertson's Tiger Fund took out $3 billion. Other
firms began pulling out in general, and especially after the
Thai baht was devalued on july 2 1997.

These firms began buying the Thai government's dollars with
bahts, predicting that the baht would fall precipitously in
comparison tot eh dollar because the Thai government would not
have any more US dollars.

From July to October, these worries steadily escalated.
Investors began pulling out and lenders stopped rolling over
loans, just as they had in Thailand. On October 17th, Taiwan
followed Thailand's lead in floating its currency. On October
23rd, the Hong Kong stock market dropped 10.4 percent, the
worst drop in ten years. On October 25, the S&P downgraded
Korea from a rating of AA- to A+, to A- at the end of November.
Kyong Shik Kang attempted to send a negotiator to Tokyo to
hopefully prevent Japanese banks from withdrawing funds, but
Japan's central banks tated they would only do so with an
IMF-supported program.

---

# Korea and intervention

On December 3rd, the IMF and Korean authorities finalized a $55
billion loan package, of which $21 billion would come from the
IMF, $10 billion would come from the World Bank, $4 billion
from the Asian Develpopment Bank, and the remaining $20 billion
as a contingency pledge from banks in twelve nations. Both the
overall loan amount and the IMF's contribution were
unprecedented. This was also one of the first times the IMF
would lend to a nation in the OECD instead of a firmly
designated "developing" country.

These reforms entailed the immediate suspension of nine
financial institutions, and their closure if they did not
submit "appropriate restructuring plans."

Besides reforms specifically for the financial sector, the IMF
also prescribed general structural reforms. These all center
around a program of economic "liberalization" that mainly
involved opening the country for foreign investment. The
ceiling on foreign ownership in Korean equities and listed
Korean shares would be raised from 7 percent and 26 percent to
fifty percent by the end of the year.^[Fifty percent might seem
high, but in 1998 the Kim administration would remove that
ceiling on foreign investment altogether.] Besides these
general ceiling adjustments, other major barriers to foreign
investment were also modified, including foreign access to
domestic money market instruments, foreign access to corporate
bonds, and general simplification of approval procedures.

---

(explanation of pictures and quotes)

---

Okay, to reflect a little bit on all of that. The quotes
