---
title: The IMF and Global Dispossession
subtitle: A literature review
author: Nathan Kim
date: Advised by Professor Lisa Lowe
nocite: '@*'
indent: true
# uncomment the below for double spacing
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{setspace}
  - \doublespacing
---

# Introduction

Since its founding in 1944, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has amassed a
total of 705 billion Special Drawing Rights in spending capacity, or about \$1
trillion. This spending capacity is deployed as loans during times of crisis,
compared to the World Bank's extensive general lending system. Through these
loans, relatively small Washington-based organization (of only \~2,300 staff
members) with no subsidiary organizations is able to move the global economy,
millions of people at a time. Its focus on low-to-middle-income countries during
crises means that the most vulnerable of the global population are affected by
its work.

The IMF's loans are not without caveats. Under the stated purpose of ensuring
loan repayment and financial stability, or "conditionality," the IMF requires
that loan-receiving countries also implement a set of macroeconomic policy
reforms known as Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs). These include "purely"
economic measures like currency devaluation, austerity measures, and
restructuring or refinancing foreign debts, but also include liberalization of
markets broadly, privatization of state-owned companies in particular, opening
the country to foreign investment, and a stipulation for the country to move
towards resource extraction and export. Although the majority of IMF loans do
come with market-rate interest rates and often require collateral, both of which
can be a significant burden for countries requesting aid, SAPs are far more
powerful in terms of creating long-term subjugating economic relations. SAPs
push countries in the Global South to cheaply produce and export goods to the
Global North, where only then they are realized as profit.[This is the main
subject of @smithImperialismTwentyFirstCentury2016] SAPs push countries to
denationalize basic necessities and turn them over to multinational corporations
in order to qualify for loans.[See @ciafoneEndowingNeoliberalUniversity2005 for
a detailed history on Yale's relationship with privatizing Indonesian power.] In
more direct terms, SAPs push countries into a recapitulated racial hierarchy, a
new imperialism, an imperialism for the twenty-first
century.[@harveyNewImperialism2003; @smithImperialismTwentyFirstCentury2016]

# Accumulation and crisis

My thesis begins with Marx, and specifically his writing on capitalist
accumulation. For Marx, the distinction between capitalism and feudalism or
other modes of production lay in employer's ability to systematically generate
profit. By only paying the amount that was required for capitalists to continue
consuming worker's labor power, or in other words low hourly wages, even selling
a product simply at its market-desired value could generate returns for the
owner of the machinery and process that created the product (also known as the
means of production). The generated profit could be reinvested to generate
additional product, turning what could be simply leftover profit into capital.

Capital accumulation inevitably leads to overaccumulation. At some point the
resources required to sustain this process reach a limit -- perhaps there is not
enough land to continue expanding a farm or factory, or there is not enough
demand to consume the products generated by the reinvestment of capital. In both
the former case of a production-side problem or the latter case of a
consumption-side problem, overaccumulation occurs because of continuous drive to
produce without end. As Marx says, “The ultimate reason for all real crises
always remains the poverty and restricted consumption of the masses as opposed
to the drive of capitalist production to develop the productive forces as though
only the absolute consuming power of society constituted their
limit.”^[@marx1992; cited in @sewell].

There are generally two strategies that can accomodate this overaccumulation. On
one hand, and as Marx described, the products may undergo a massive devaluation.
This constitutes most of our modern economic crises, including the Asian
financial crisis as will be explained below. When products that were in excess
are devalued, they can again be bought and sold as capital, and the march
towards production can begin again.

Marxist philosopher-activist Rosa Luxemburg pointed out another possibility in
_The Accumulation of Capital_ (1913), arguing that the underpayment of workers
would require products under capitalism to be underbought, and that capitalism's
solution for itself was expansion via war and conquest to find new consumer
bases where these surplus commodities could be realized as profit. Around the
same time period, Vladmir Lenin published his iconic pamphlet _Imperialism: The
Highest Stage of Capitalism_ that detailed the converse of this process. While
Luxemburg saw expansion as capitalism's temporary "fix" in providing new
consumers, Lenin saw expansion as capitalism's temporary "fix" in providing new
resources and workers from which a larger array of products could be generated.
Both saw the events of the time, like Japan's annexation of Korea and intrusion
into China,

Over a hundred years after Marx first wrote about overaccumulation, David Harvey
revisited these works and synthesized them with Marx's writing on _primitive
accumulation_. Marx saw the economic process of accumulation as having started
with capital obtained by entirely noneconomic and violent means. These included
gold and silver taken from the Americas, the enslavement and murder of
Indigenous populations there, the looting of South Asia by the British East
India Company, the Transatlantic slave trade and enslavement of Africans in
America, and the forceful expropriation of land from the English peasantry.
Harvey argued in 2003 that these violent appropriations that Marx described did
not just contribute to accumulation during the prehistory of capital, as Marx
described, but was an essential aspect of accumulation itself. Similarly,
restructuring and expansion described by Lenin, Luxemburg, and others that
capitalism required did not only take place not only in times of formal economic
crises but throughout all of capitalist history. Given that these appropriations
were not "primitive" as Marx called them but were an integral part of
accumulation, Harvey termed these processes as _accumulation by dispossession_.

In addition to a temporal synthesis, Harvey's theory of accumulation by
dispossession also pushed theories of capitalism towards viewing capitalism as a
social and dispossessive process. Marx originally described capital as both a
social and economic relation, and although no one has challenged or doubted this
characterization, traditional Marxist theory and contemporary trends in cultural
studies and the humanities have somewhat suggested a widening rift in the social
and economic aspects of capitalism. The theory of accumulation by dispossession
called for a return to this original formulation, made urgent and

# Racialized accumulation by dispossession

The phrase and theory of accumulation by dispossession has struck a chord in the
past twenty years, generating thousands of texts that expand on Harvey's own
writing. [SPAM CITATIONS HERE]. Accumul

This will begin with Paula Chakravartty and Denise da Silva's collection _Race,
Empire, and the Crisis of the
Subprime_.[@chakravarttyAccumulationDispossessionDebt2012a] They note that while
Harvey's theory of _accumulation by dispossession_ emphasizes the social
processes of dispossession that are at capitalism's core, Harvey takes race for
granted in his writing because he notes simply the disproportionate burden of
these acts of dispossession on people of color. He stops short of discussing the
racial logic that would allow such a burden to appear. Thus, even while
criticizing the burden of the economic impact on people of color, race and
racism are taken as "primitive" or preexisting concepts over which modern
capitalist forces take hold. Da Silva and Chakravartty push back on this and
argue that race continues to order accumulation in and of itself, and
specifically in the subprime mortgage crisis that Black recipients of loans are
_continually_ configured to be outside of the relationship of an economic
transaction and the capacity to pay one side of the trade.[See also
@silvaGlobalIdeaRace for more from da Silva on this topic.]

But their discussion, while framed as a study of global capitalism and arguing
that "race as the _naturalized_ ways U.S. Americans deploy the term cannot be
the privileged and sole critical descriptor" of the various manifestations of
the logics of dispossession on the "others of Europe," still stops short of
studying dispossession across the globe. Their collection does not touch on
relationships between or across nations, institutions that drive these processes
forth, or how the crises they discuss manifest elsewhere. My project will
attempt to complement to their discussion by discussing debt and raciality as
global concepts. While Chakravartty and da Silva focus on U.S. banking
institutions and the subprime mortgage loan, I will focus on the IMF's crisis
loans; while they critique the dispossession of the "others of Europe" by
focusing on Black and Latino/a homeowners, I will focus on the (mis)handling of
the 1997 Asian financial crisis, and as a case study focus on the crisis'
escalation to catastrophe in South Korea.

# Dependency and world-systems theory

The second major line of Marxist theorists I will draw from are the scholars
exploring dependency and world-systems theory.

Though dependency theory draws from Marxists theorists of imperialism like Lenin
and Luxemburg, it began in a more official sense a few years after the end of
World War II. As scores of nations around the world declared and fought for
their independence, trade relations were increasingly not enforced by one nation
having sovereign power over another, but by the laws of the "free" market and
trade agreements between two distinct nations. But the reigns of former colonial
powers were of course not relinquished with formal independence. A key example
of this lies in the trends of prices in "primary products" like food and water
against trends of prices in manufactured goods like machinery. Primary products,
as necessities, often could not raise prices in response to demand as
manufactured goods do. As a result, economies based on exports of raw goods like
primary products have less and less purchasing power over time compared to
manufactured goods from larger nations. Formerly colonized countries that have
had their economies forcibly oriented towards the production and export of raw
materials are thus placed at a ever-worsening disadvantage once they enter the
"free" market.

Hans Singer and Raul Prebisch wrote on this dynamic separately in 1949,
comprising what would become known as the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis of
inequality between countries.^[p@prebisch1962; @singer1949] This also laid the
foundation for dependency theory, or a social-economic analysis of the
inequality between former colonial powers and the peoples they once colonized.
Other scholars quickly followed Prebisch and Singer, expanding on dependency
theory to account for many other factors besides the trade relationship
described in the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis. Walter Rodney, in his famous book
_How Europe Underdeveloped Africa_, wrote on Europe's colonial relationship with
Africa as the chief cause of underdeveloped economies in Africa. Far from simply
progressing unevenly, Rodney contends that Europe was only able to "progress" to
its current stage of capitalist success because it deprived that from African
nations through slavery, structural

The common point in all of these theories is recognizing interdependent but
uneven pattern of development between "core" countries with financial power and
"periphery" countries that do not. For countries at the core to enjoy everything
from automobiles to electricity, both tangible material resources and financial
capital in the abstract had to be moved from countries at the periphery to
countries at the core of the world.

Perhaps the most recognizable extension of dependency theory comes in the form
of world-systems theory, which emerged during the 1970s most famously with
Immanuel Wallerstein's writing. Like dependency theory, world-systems theory
theorizes development not as a country's internal process but as inseparable
from its placein the world at large. Unlike dependency theory, which focused on
units of relationships between former colonial powers and their respective
former colonies, Wallerstein attempted to take a more expansive perspective in
also considering intra-regional and within-nation relationships. Given that
capitalist exploitation occurred in much the same way within a nation itself,
and that

In other words, for Wallerstein the subject of analysis was not a single
country's dependency on another, but how the world at large functioned while
surplus value was extracted from some places and people. This required specific

I view dependency theory and world-systems theory as essential in understanding
the capitalist world today, but this family of theories is incomplete. Both
dependency theory and world-systems theory focus on material goods and their
transport, and in a secondary sense focus on finance capital and its transport
across the globe. This does not apply well to countries like Korea; the U.S. did
not begin occupying Korea in 1945 for economic or material gain, but to support
the logic of liberal capitalism that was threatened by the Soviet Union, North
Korea, and China. Nonetheless, Korea never stopped depending on the U.S. and
paid in large amounts for this. For example, South Korea fulfilled the U.S.
request to send 750,000 troops as support during the Vietnam War in exchange for
technological and financial repayment that Korea received for decades from the
U.S. Korea's economy for many years was based on exports to its former colonizer
of Japan and to the United States[ELABORATE ].^[@hart-landsberg1984a, @han1974].
In other words, the relationship between Korea and the United States does not
fit the typical cases described by dependency and world-systems theorists, but
the relationship has still been one of a former colony in the periphery being
dependent on a "core" imperial power, to the effect of upholding the pulse of
capitalism.

But this issue goes beyond just Korea. The limitation of studies of dependency
and world-systems theory to just material and financial capital prevents these
schools of thought from deconstructing the epistemological categories that let
material goods and financial capital move, or that may appear even when the
movement of physical resources does not. Political ideology, race and gender,
space, among others remain mostly unquestioned in discussions of dependency or
world-systems. Theorists ike Wallerstein and Rodney, who do theorize on how
capital accumulation functions across race as a category, neglect to deconstruct
race or ask how the category itself was formed.

To some extent this incompleteness comes from time. Dependency theory and
world-systems theory flourished during the second half of the twentieth century,
some thirty to fifty years before Harvey would write about accumulation by
dispossession and nearly seventy years before Ferreira da Silva and Chakravartty
would critique and extend Harvey. Dependency theory and world-systems theory
would also precede other foundational thinkers on race that we often turn to
today, like Stuart Hall, Kimberle Crenshaw, Dorothy Roberts, the Combahee River
Collective, Michael Omi and Howard Winant, and others. But in another sense this
incompleteness is something more than cannot be swept away.

In sum, though they take a capacious understanding of the modern capitalist
world as a whole, they leave unquestioned

# The IMF and the Asian financial crisis

My thesis seeks to apply the above theories to the Asian financial crisis and
resulting IMF intervention.

The economic crisis of 1997 exemplifies this dynamic and exposes a momentary
contradiction in the march to capitalist modernity. Before the crisis, South
Korea was boasting record low unemployment rates, had worker's rights and labor
laws that were among the strongest of the OECD group, all with a consistently
low inflation rate and while being known for its cautious stance on foreign
investment.^[@cliftIMFPoliticsAusterity2018;
@hwangLongTermImplicationsNeoliberal2015; @kim2001imf] But the unemployment rate
in South Korea quadrupled in less than a year after the crisis began in October
1997, and the IMF quickly transitioned from an obscure international economic
agency into a household name.^[@kim2002; @martin-jones2007; @park1999].

The former face of the new Korean generation and proclaimer of equality, Kim
Dae-Jung, turned an about-face on his belief in protecting the Korean economy
and quickly accepted the IMF's recommendation to put Korea's central banks up
for sale.^[@chossudovsky2000] In other words, the glass image of capitalist
stability was cracked and laid bare, as the IMF quickly opened the South Korean
economy for outside financial institutions to buy up and the labor rights fought
for by unions were reset after company acquisitions. My paper will focus on the
racial logic that made these events possible, and how they fit into the IMF's
view of the world at large.

Dependency and world-systems theory, as well as writing on racialized
accumulation by dispossession, have much to offer the current scholarship on the
Asian financial crisis and resulting IMF intervention.

# Korean history

The above theoretical contribution can be seen sharply in Korea's experience
during the Asian financial crisis. This application would extend much

English-language histories of Korea are limited, but

One foundational group of scholars of modern Korean history includes Bruce
Cumings, Carter Eckert, Charles Armstrong, Suh Dae-Sook, and Michael
Robinson.^[The personal histories of many of these scholars is interesting.
Professor Ria Chae gave a comparison in a seminar last year of Cumings to Carter
Eckert, another famous/foundational scholar of Korean history in the United
States. They're both very successful academically, having endowed chairs at the
University of Chicago and Harvard. And both began their interest in Korea from
being deployed to Korea as part of the Peace Corps draft. But while Carter
Eckert mostly stuck to his duties, Cumings often left his post to join
protestors of then-dictator Park Chung Hee and hosted organizers in his home. He
was also an early member of the Committee of Concerned Asian Scholars that was
formed in opposition to the U.S. war in Vietnam and in solidarity with
liberation movements of the Third World. A lot of this personal history is
reflected in the kind of history he writes, which seeks to deconstruct U.S.
aggression and highlight Korean resistance to this aggression. Not to idolize a
tenured white male scholar, but yes, I hope my own study is on a trajectory
closer to Cumings' than Eckert's.] Robinson and Eckert set precedents for
scholarship in Korean history in the colonial era, while Cumings, Suh, and
Armstrong wrote extensively on the peninsula post-Korean War. Cumings in
particular cemented his legacy as a revisionist historian, showing in _The
Origins of the Korean War_ that the United States military effectively began the
Korean War with the arbitrary separation of the nation in 1945 and the numerous
massacres and concentration camps set up by the US-backed Syngman Rhee regime in
Korea between 1945 and 1950. These latter three scholars also established the
first wave of research in North Korean history, often a difficult task given the
opposing ideology of the U.S. military (in the case of Cumings) or the cautious
nature of the North Korean government (in the case of Suh and
Armstrong).^[Charles Armstrong notably published the first set of studies
involving Record Group 242 of the National Archives & Records Administration,
which contains some 1.6 million items captured during the Korean War era. Many
of these originally belonged to the North Korean army and were left behind
during retreat. Still not many scholars have used this archive, despite its
massive size.]

Histories of Korea after this first generation of scholars has been much more
nuanced, with a greater turn towards cultural studies. Historians of colonial
Korea today include Theodore Jun Yoo, Todd Henry, Gi-Wook Shin, David Fedman,
and many others. Rather than focusing on establishing a chronological history of
Korea under Japanese rule, these historians focus on specific epistemelogical
and social categories that are regulated by the Japanese state and contested by
native Koreans. On questions of land, to cosmopolitan space, to gender and
sexuality, the Japanese government put forth formal and informal regulations,
and in response Koreans would rebel through moments like the March First
Movement, through guerilla fighting in the Korean mountains, or by striking in
Japanese-Korean factories.^[@henry2020; @shin2014; @shin1999; @yoo2008;
@fedman2020; @henry2016].

After the period of Japanese colonization, Korea was split in two by the United
States, and then

(modern histories of the korean war) For histories of the 1960s and 70s,

(modern histories of the era of military dictatorships)

Following the Korean War, South Korea experienced a period of military
dictatorships beginning with Syngman Rhee in 1945 and ending with Chun Doo-Hwan
in 1989. An unprecedented level of violence occurred in Korea during this era,

- todd henry assimilating seoul
- todd henry queer korea

(modern histories of the ) histories of the korean war

-

north korea

- suzy kim, eveyrdya life during the north korean revolution
-

Charles Kim, Paul Chang, Namhee Lee, and many others have written on South Korea
under numerous military dictatorships, documenting the intellectual and cultural
trends that fueled resistance in these regimes.^[@chang2015; @kim2017; @lee2011]

contemporary eras

- seungsook moon - militarized modernity
- Jin-Kyung Lee - service economies
-

In other words, recent trends in histories of Korea have turned away from
uncovering an objective truth as a first generation of U.S. scholars had, but
towards critiquing and deconstructing social categories that led to certain
trends in history.^[This is not at all to incriminate the first generation of
scholars as being unnuanced or incorrect; histories like Cumings' that exposed
what military aggression and popular narratives hid are of course essential.]

However, much of this critical perspective is lacking on contemporary Korea, and
specifically on Korea situated in a global context. (comment/ridicule amsden
here)@amsden1992

As will be discussed below, there is a substantial amount of scholarship
analyzing the Asian financial crisis in Korea, but the key question of a racial
logic or hierarchy through which Korea and the IMF (or any global body) relate
to each other is little discussed.

South Korea is relevant for a number of reasons. It was under the rule of four
different states over the past one hundred and fifty years, destroyed by war and
four decades of dictatorship after its supposed "liberation" from Japan, and
separated arbitrarily from its northern half by the whim of two U.S. Navy
Officers after World War II.^[Some useful thinkers here are @chang2015;
@cho2008; and @cumings2002] Yet today the nation enjoys a sort of "model
modernity" status of postindustrial success.^[While the term "model modernity"
was said to me by Professor Lowe as a conversational, on-the-spot insight during
an advising meeting, I believe others have deployed this term as well --
specifically @lye1999; but also @chettri2020 and @wilks2008.] Like the
much-discussed myth of Asian Americans as a "model minority" in the U.S., that
status connotes a group that has endured hardship but ultimately has played by
the (Western) rules of capitalist success to achieve some semblance of
"prosperity" today. Not only does this rely on a false notion of prosperity, for
neither the "model minority" Asian Americans nor the "model modernity" of South
Korea are liberated from colonialism today, but the status also hides how the
logic that led to the "success" of certain groups perpetuates the oppression of
others. South Korea has only enjoyed "order" because Korea has cemented
patriarchal norms through draft culture,^[Or "militarized modernity," as
popularized by @moon2005], and it has only enjoyed "peace" because it sent
almost a million troops to Vietnam in exchange for U.S. capital and technology
during the Vietnam War.^[@chang2015] Other countries that do not experience the
same level of economic "success" lie outside the bounds of capitalist modernity
as result, and the "model modernity" of South Korea serves as a comparison
against which other nations and races may be castigated.

# Going forward (gaps)

More than just being a difference in topic or scope, I hope that this
positioning will enable my project to connect Chakravartty and da Silva's
analysis of the racial logic of debt with postcolonial theory and theories of
globalization. These are undoubtedly concepts that Da Silva and Chakravartty
stretch towards in their collection, and other authors have similarly tried to
bridge the gap between contemporary theories of race and theories of
globalization.^[Some of my favorite ones are @amin2014;
@featherstoneGlobalCultureNationalism1990; @sassen1998; and
@jenkinsBondsInequalityDebt2021, but there is so much insight and work in this
field that cannot fit into a single footnote.] But in my view, very little
literature has questioned the racial categories that give rise to the
"globalized" world of today. Discussion on globalization criticizes the unequal
economic nature and sometimes (like Harvey) notes the disproportionate impact of
this economic burden on people of color, but no theoretical or empirical
discussion has discussed how the racial and economic imbalances are not
coincidental but part of the same fundamental process of capitalist
dispossession. I hope that my thesis can fill this gap.

\newpage

# Bibliography
