### announcements

- primary source paper due oct 29th

---

### tatyana's paper

- [](https://perspectivasonline.com/downloads/sacred-resistance-the-sanctuary-movement-from-reagan-to-trump/)[https://perspectivasonline.com/downloads/sacred-resistance-the-sanctuary-movement-from-reagan-to-trump/](https://perspectivasonline.com/downloads/sacred-resistance-the-sanctuary-movement-from-reagan-to-trump/)

---

### primary source "analysis"

- what is it?
  - Republic of Korea, Economics Bureau of the. “Fiscal Reform
    Under the IMF System,” December 20, 1998
- who wrote it?
  - korean financial bureau
- when?
  - 12/20/1998, which is just about a year after the crisis
    began in '97 nad the IMF loan packages were accepted; the
    korean economy had launched a near-turnaround at this time
  - but of cours emillions of people still without jobs,
    etc,................
- how was it written?
  - sort of an "official" or canonical, public government
    report that was meant for internal use
  - info in here is probably like the kind shared to IMF reps
    (idk about this exact document but yeah)
- what does it contribute?
  - a portrayal of the government's response and "face" to the
    IMF

---

### interpretive/meaning q

- what does it convey
- what quesitons does it raise
- what sources are like it
- what have others said
- what other info do you need to understand it
- how does it relate to thesis quesiton

I think this resource will be most useful for my thesis in just
providing quotable numbers that I can just quickly cite. Just
saying things like social welfare was XXXX won in '98 while
financial restructuring had a high cost too at YYYY won or
osmething

In terms of critically reading between/against the grain, it's
pretty hard because i dont actually know korean and the
document is not OCR-able lol

but it's clear that there is an amount of self-indictment on
foreign resource dependence

but it's confusing to me bc from secondary source readings it
seems that the IMF pushed this even harder

---

### notes for thesis work

- want to use OCR on files, which makes me realize that there
  may actually be a computational/technical component to this
  project besides just the viz. this requires:
- conda env
  - see
    [](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/52038034/push-and-pull-my-conda-environment-using-git)[https://stackoverflow.com/questions/52038034/push-and-pull-my-conda-environment-using-git](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/52038034/push-and-pull-my-conda-environment-using-git)
    for conda-git integratoin
  - use R packages in here too
- file hosting
  - for now an aws s3 bucket?
