# The Asian Financial Crisis of 1997

If the Latin American debt crisis was an experiment on the
continental scale to establish the IMF's logic, the Asian debt
crisis was a

- latin american debt crisis was experiment
- asian crisis exposes the hierarchical and contradictory
  nature of that logic

that logi

-

The Asian financial crisis was born out of conditions very
similar to those that created the Latin American debt crisis.
In brief, in the 1980s, Asian countries experienced a surge of
investment from foreign creditors. A series of shocks in the
global financial world (including the Latin American debt
crisis) led to this "investment" becoming unrepayable debts
that mounted higher and higher. Thailand eventually became the
first to acknowledge these debts could not be repaid in
July 1997. A chain reaction of foreign divestment began,
leading to the closure of giant corporations in Asia, millions
of people losing their jobs, and intervention from the IMF
becoming the only possible option for affected countries. That
intervention was coupled with higher interest rates and more
stringent conditions than those that had been suggested for
Latin American countries, even while the 1980s had revealed
those reforms to be a failure.

As will be argued in this section, most profitable (wc) for the
IMF was that the crisis seemed to stem from Asian financial
misbehavior and the IMF's interventions appeared to succeed.
Korea, for example, paid its loan amount of $21 billion back
four years before the required deadline of 2005, leading to
congratulatory remarks from IMF Managing Director Horst Kohler.
Kohler would state that the relationship between the IMF and
South Korea "has been exemplary and in many respects serves as
a model for other countries." For other nations, Kohler and
other IMF officials would issue similar but tamer remarks that
the crisis had been born out of non-cooperation but was solved
through "acceptable" repayment schedules and policy adoptions.

By leveraging the blame onto the crisis-ridden nations, the IMF
avoids culpability of itself and of creditor banks that
participated in the speculation at the center of the crisis.
More broadly and more importantly, the discourse of the IMF
allows itself to be painted as a fundamentally necessary policy
institution in order for debtor countries to be properly
incorporated into the Western world of capitalism and to be
saved should they fail. Importantly, though the loaned amount
is important and necessary, at the heart of the IMF programs
are signals to -- they are chiefly discursive, not material.

The rest of this thesis explores this series of events in
greater detail. I first discuss the years building up to the
crisis, specifically the economic and political liberalization
of the 1980s that several Asian economies underwent, as well as
the foreign speculative investment that emerged in response to
this liberalization. This is followed by a discussion of the
crisis itself, from outbreak and escalation to intervention and
aftermath. I conclude by discussing the post-crisis analyses
that the IMF and its critics have undertaken to retrospectively
understand the crisis.

The history here will focus on South Korea, and for context
will include the crisis' development in Thailand and to a
lesser extent in Indonesia. But the trends here are app

- these are where crisis hit the most
- for korea it's because the

## Speculation

For Indonesia, Thailand, and South Korea, the decade and a half
leading up to the crisis can be described both as an economic
boom and a series of mistakes that would lead to meltdown
in 1997.

In other parts of the world, these periods can be considered
fairly tumultuous economically. Financial institutions
worldwide panicked after Saddam Hussain's invasion of Kuwait in
1990, leading to a sharp increase in the price of oil worldwide
and triggering a minor economic recession in the United States
and Europe.The Latin American debt crisis had of course taken
hold in the 1980s, and even in the 1990s nations in Latin
America were shaken again with the Mexican peso crisis of 1994.
Perhaps most importantly, the Soviet Union was dissolved in
December 1991 after a decade and a half of President
Gorbachev's liberalization programs. This triggered a
depression in Eastern Europe after Russia suddenly stopped many
of its export programs.

For Indonesia, Thailand, South Korea, and other nations,
however, both economic and political situations appeared more
stable than had been for decades. In Thailand, sinc e

In South Korea, after four decades of military dictatorships,
the nation began in 1987 a formal democracy after the June
Democratic Sturggle against President Chun Doo-Hwan [wording].
From here on, [the country was fairly stable economically]. In
Thailand and

hm it seems that thailand had a fairly tumultuous government
with several coups through the 80s and 90s...

In these three nations, financial institutions freed from
previous lending restrictions meant that new avenues of
investment could be found. For Thailand especially, this meant
financing real estate development as part of a more general
development boom. These projects were generally seen as safe
because many of these development projects were under the
supervision of the government, and because these projects were
collateralized with real estate that would increase in value
over time. Domestic banks took on these projects at such high
amounts that they eventually ran low on cash, themselves
requiring loans from creditors in the United States.

This accelerated for a near-constant period since 1973, despite
Thailand's several coups in this period. Banks continued to
take out larger loans from financial institutions, and similar
to the practices of Latin American countries pre-crisis, there
existed implicit guarantees that short-term loans could simply
be "rolled over" when they were due as long as the markets on
the whole appeared stable. International banks continued to
finance domestic banks, and domestic banks financed real estate
projects.

To attract these foreign investors, the Thai government raised
interest rates on Thai bonds [get specifics] in the early
1990s, meaning the value of Thai currency and products as a
whole rose. Thai exports thus became less desirable in the
global market. At the same time, a few investments turning sour
pushed banks to target riskier investments to make up their
losses. The risk on these investments was also generally
underestimated given the economic success of Thailand at the
time.

This pattern resulted in the Thai currency being valued at
significantly more than what foreign investors thought it was
worth. It also appeared that the value of the baht would soon
drop given the riskier investments that banks had been taking
on. Perhaps the biggest contributor to this instability was the
Thai government's commitment to

Foreign speculation began in this period, as outside investors
bought bonds from the Thai government in the Thai baht currency
that could be redeemed for dollars at a predetermined rates.
These investors beleieved that the value of the baht would soon
drop, making the dollars that they would gain a profitable
investment compared to the baht that had been put in. [fix]

American hedge funds began making their move. George Soros'
Quantum Fund took a $1 billion position against the Thai baht
in 1996 out of the Fund's total assets of $12 billion at the
time. Julia Robertson's Tiger Fund took a $3 billion position
against the Thai baht. In response, the Thai government began
raising its interest rates even higher, hoping it would prevent
foreigners from purchasing assets that could be used in
speculative attacks, while still encouraging foreigners to
finance Thai banks' development projects as explained above.
The heightened interest rates likely did have some deterrent
effect on speculators, but speculators' positions still kept
climbing. [get some numbers on this]

It was at this period that discussions between the Thai and
Indonesian governments and the IMF began. The IMF repeatedly
attempted to convince the Thai government to devalue its
currency and cut its losses, which the Thai government refused
to do on the grounds that it would lead to speculators' massive
profiting and could trigger an economic panic. The IMF also
pressed the Thai government to share macroeconomic data, which
the Thai government was extremely wary of sharing given that
this could also trigger an economic panic. Also, despite the
mostly cordial nature, the political nature of the IMF even
before the crisis was fairly sensitive. The Thai government
likely also did not want to provide data to the IMF
surveillance programs ("surveillance" being the official IMF
designation) because it saw the IMF as reflecting the interests
of Western creditors.

Discussions between the IMF Managing Director Michael
Camdessus, IMF First Deputy Managing Directory Stanley Fischer,
and [officials names] would continue for six months. In May
1997, the first speculative attack began, with foreign
investors selling their

--- give discussion of indonesia here

Korea faced a much different situation than Thailand in the
years leading up to the crisis, but creditors and the IMF
believed the same patterns of secrecy and "crony capitalism"
were at fault for the crisis. South Korea had been formally
freed from colonial rule in 1945, but since then had
experienced a tumultuous four decades of beginning with rule by
the U.S. military, followed by a civil war provoked by the U.S.
division of Korea, and then decades of military dictatorships
and civilian protests.

The military dictatorships in this period were partially able
to maintain rule because of their heavy emphasis on
industrialization and the need for economic stability, which
even these regimes' most ardent opponents agreed on. In the
eyes of the Rhee, Park, and Chun regimes, constitutional rights
could come after Korea had its own internationally competitive
conglomerates. Until then, opposition had to be quelled.
Millions of people were imprisoned, first through concentration
camps established by Syngman Rhee, and then for twenty years
through political repression by the Park Chung Hee regime's
Korean Central Intelligence Agency (KCIA).

Of the most prominent of these detainees was Kim Dae-Jung, a
presidential candidate in 1971 that became the face of the
opposition against Park Chung Hee. He was nearly assassinated
after the election results showed much closer than the Park
regime was expected, then was kidnapped in 1973 by the KCIA
after he fled form the country. He was sentenced to death by
Park's successor, Chun Doo Hwan, in 1980, after which Kim fled
to the United States. Kim's continued criticism against these
regimes was that economic success was absolutely not contingent
on the restriction of human rights. [some other stuff] He
gained

Given this position as the face of the Korean left for nearly
twenty years before he finally became President, it is at first
surprising that his first action as President was to
wholeheartedly accept the IMF policy prescription for reforms.

- "If we are to put the Korean economy back on the right track,
  we must develop democracy and a free market economy in
  parallel, as Western countries have done." - speech at emory
  in 1998
- criticized the government-led economic model of governments
  past

- Especially during the periods of military rule when any
  notion of civil rights was explicitly pushed towards the
  side, a notion outside of the promises of liberalism was
  impossible/unthinkable

  - not a indictment of individual people but of the conditions
    from which that line of thought was born

- was given the nickname "neoliberal revolutionist"

---

Kim's election was part of many developments symbolizing
Korea's arrival to modernity. Decades of protest culminated in
the June Struggle of 1987 and the establishment of popular
elections for the Korean Presidency. The year after, Korea
hosted the 1988 Olympics, spending billions of dollars on
development and ceremonies to demonstrate its progress
[**reword**]. In 1995, the World Bank moved Korea from the
"borrower" status it had previously occupied, and in 1996,
Korea joined the OECD. It seemed fitting to many that the most
popular presidential candidate be Kim Dae-Jung, as if Korea had
finally graduated from the dictatorships Kim so prominently
stood against.

In the midst of these developments were the continued
proliferation of large family-owned _chaebol_ corporations,
which had first arisen with the Park regime's subsidy policies.
International financial bodies like the IMF were cautious about
these; while most attributed the so-called "Miracle on the Han
River" to the state-assisted development of these corporations,
the heavy hand of the state seemed antithetical to the free
market enthusiasts of the day.

This cautious stance became only more so as 1997 [word??
developed? unfolded?]. On January 23, 1997, Hanbo Steel
declared bankruptcy with a debt of $5.8 billion to domestic
banks. Rumors flew alleging that President Kim Young Sam's son,
Kim Hyon Chul, had pushed banks to support the failing company.
Sammi, another steel manufacturer, and Jinro, South Korea's
largest liquor manufacturer, defaulted on their debts in March
and April and had to be given emergency loans by domestic
banks.

Korea's economy otherwise seemed to be doing fine [elaborate],
but the news of the failure of these large companies made
foreigners cautious. Short-term loans that had previously been
supplied to Korean banks began to stop being rolled over. When
Thailand declared on July 2nd, 1997 that it would float the
baht, foreigners began to panic. Perhaps the largest cause for
alarm came on July 15th, when Kia Motors declared bankruptcy
and control was handed to a government-formed bankruptcy
protection committee. Kia was the eighth-largest _chaebol_ in
Korea and much larger than any of the preceding bankrupt
groups,

The fall of Hanbo, Sammi, Jinro, and Kia stand out not because
they were triggered by the foreign capital crisis escalating in
Thailand, nor that their fall was triggered by a corrupt
corporate practice, but because they were not rescued as they
had been in the four decades prior. Kang Kyong Shik stated this
bluntly in response to the fall of Sammi, saying that "the
government is no longer able or willing to rescue poorly
managed, bankrupt companies with taxpayer's money." Even in the
leadup to the crisis, the massive debts incurred by Sammi,
Hanbo, and Kia especially occurred not because of a
macroeconomic problem but because the steel industry as a whole
had been producing more than ever before, and thus previous
giants in steel had to sell steel for lower. In the conclusive
words of Robert Feenstra, Gary Hamilton, and Eun Mie Lim,
"[r]ather than regarding these events as a _failure_ of the
capital market, we could instead view them as an initially
_successful_ attempt to separate corporate and political
control, by allowing bankrupt groups to work with creditors
with the government coming in as a last resort."

But international observers took the opposite view. "Crony
capitalism" appeared to have taken its toll, and rather than
the companies falling because of government-business practices
working, foreigners worried that they had fell because of
government-business practices failing. Combined with the
capital crisis happening in Thailand at the time, it seemed
that the "Miracle on the Han River" had not really been a
miracle at all, and was even plausible to be just corrupt
officials and business leaders propping each other up for the
past few decades. They also correctly believed that the
bankruptcy of Kia in particular would have ripple effects to
those companies in Korea that depended on Kia to sell or buy
from, and would worsen the seemingly already-fragile financial
situation in Korea. [find references and discussion on this;
nyt/lat/wsj/economist/etc;]

From July to October, these worries steadily escalated.
Investors began pulling out and lenders stopped rolling over
loans, just as they had in Thailand and Indonesia. On October
17th, Taiwan followed Thailand's lead in floating its currency.
On October 23rd, the Hong Kong stock market dropped 10.4
percent, the worst drop in ten years. On October 25, the S&P
downgraded Korea from a rating of AA- to A+, to A- at the end
of November. Investors continued panicking and pulling out
[state some specifics]. Kyong Shik Kang attempted to send a
negotiator to Tokyo to hopefully prevent Japanese banks from
withdrawing funds, but Japan's central banks tated they would
only do so with an IMF-supported program.

## Intervention

The crisis was nearly at hand. If the trend of foreign
investment withholding rollvers continued, Korean banks would
not be able to repay its next batches of payments, and that
situation would only become worse as investors would see and
then pull out in turn. On November 16th, IMF Managing Director
Michael Camdessus held an impromptu secret meeting with Kyong
Shik Kang while on a trip to Asia to discuss a possible IMF
package. The IMF at this time also began orchestrating an
international maneuver to prevent an all-out crisis, with most
of Camdessus' staff spending their days and nights calling
international banks and attempting to convince them to roll
over their loans so that the crisis in Korea would avoid
becoming a catastrophe. Korea would owe $9 billion by the end
of December if the banks did not take the IMF's word that Korea
could repay at a later time

On December 4th, the IMF and Korean authorities finalized a $55
billion loan package, of which $21 billion would come from the
IMF, $10 billion would come from the World Bank, $4 billion
from the Asian Develpopment Bank, and the remaining $20 billion
as a contingency pledge from banks in twelve nations. Both the
overall loan amount and the IMF's contribution were
unprecedented. This was also one of the first times the IMF
would lend to a nation in the OECD instead of a firmly
designated "developing" country.

In other words, the loan amount itself was massive. But the
IMF's strategy was not to provide enough cash for Korea's debt
troubles to pass. Of the stated loan amount, only $5 billion
was available in December 1997, with the rest being distributed
through 1998 and most of the loans not even used at all.^[Of
course, $5 billion is still massive, being (for comparison) the
entire amount provided to Mexico during the first phase of the
Latin American debt crisis.] They certainly weren't enough to
pay off the $130 billion Korea owed, and the initial infusion
was not even enough for Korea to make its loan deadlines in
December 1997. Instead, the loans were mostly an attempted
message to foreign creditors that Korea was safe; the IMF and
the World Bank were intervening, so Korea was a safe
investment.

At first, foreign banks did not find this adequate, not even to
fulfill Korea's short-term payments. This judgment continued
the cyclical self-fulfilling prophecy at the heart of the
crisis: as foreign investors lost confidence, they pulled their
money out, putting Korea into the dire economic situation that
the investors had worried about. For much of December the
rollover rate remained at around 15% -- much lower than what
was needed for Korea to avoid declaring bankruptcy. On December
19th, the Korean government begged the United States government
to in turn persuade the IMF to orchestrate another round of
negotiations. By December 23rd, the IMF was able to orchestrate
this international maneuver, where the IMF directed central
banks in twelve countries, and those central banks in turn
pushed banks in their own countries to roll over loans to
Korean debtors. All of these efforts were joined through daily
reporting requirements to the IMF, and resulted in about 95% of
Korea's debt being rolled over.

Most important in this appeal to creditors were the harsh
policy prescriptions the IMF attached to Korea's loan package.
The IMF believed that the crisis came about because of decades
of "crony capitalism" hidden by the strong arm of the Korean
state which ultimately scared off investors. The solution was
the converse of this: foreign confidence had to be restored
through strong reforms. Importantly, the IMF recognized at
these points that the immediate triggers and solutions to the
crisis were not any fundamental problems, but the beliefs of
foreigners in Korea as a safe investment. In the words of
Canadian Finance Minister Paul Martin on behalf of the G-7
nations, "A successful program will require a continued
sustained commitment to reform by the Korean authorities,
appropriate financial support from the official sector as
outlined above conditioned on the strong policies necessary to
restore confidence, and a successful effort by the Korean
authorities to secure longer term financing from private
creditors and the international capital markets."

The appeals between the IMF and partner banks thus meant
pitching to these institutions the reforms the IMF would
implement in Korea. From the first phase of the crisis that
resulted in the December 4th loan package, these reforms [were
quite harsh], with Camdessus and even President Clinton urging
Korean President Young Sam Kim and Secretary of Treasury Kihwan
Kim to publicly announce they would adopt extensive reforms.
They escalated further over the course of December, first by
IMF administrators that viewed the initial policies as too
soft, then by Kihwan Kim as a desperate bid after banks still
appeared hesitant to roll over their loans.

These reforms entailed the immediate suspension of nine
financial institutions, and their closure if they did not
submit "appropriate restructuring plans." With the euphemistic
caveat that it would "entail losses to shareholders," the IMF
declared in a December 4th press release that many financial
institutions of any standing would be subject to mergers and
acquisitions as from both domestic and foreign investors. The
IMF conclues this section with a standalone paragraph stating
simply that "to promote competition and efficiency in the
financial sector, the authorities will allow foreigners to
establish bank subsidiaries and brokerage houses by mid-1998."

Besides reforms specifically for the financial sector, the IMF
also prescribed general structural reforms. These all center
around a program of economic "liberalization" that mainly
involved opening the country for foreign investment. The
ceiling on foreign ownership in Korean equities and listed
Korean shares would be raised from 7 percent and 26 percent to
fifty percent by the end of 1997, which would entail quite a
dramatic shift considering this agreement was finalized at the
beginning of December 1997.^[Fifty percent sounds ridiculous to
me, but even crazier is that the ceiling on foreign investment
in listed shares would actually be removed by the Korean
government altogether in 1998. I haven't been able to find data
on if the proportion of foreign investment even approached any
of these limits, but the fact that the Korean government saw it
fit and useful to raise the limits indicates that a very high
proportion of foreign investment was desired.] Besides these
general ceiling adjustments, other major barriers to foreign
investment were also modified, including foreign access to
domestic money market instruments^[Money market instruments are
short-term loans, typically to bridge two payments. A company
might use this kind of device if they had to pay a supplier one
week to make a product but would only receive customer payment
for that product in the next week after.], foreign access to
corporate bonds, and general simplification of approval
procedures.

- both candidates pledge to soften imf reforms, but kiwhan kim
  asks larry summers to help persuade banks to roll over loans
  in exchange for toguher program. everyone else in korea also
  jumps on board near the end in december
- kim dae-jung wins election
- joseph stiglitz, jeffrey sachs, and others start protesting

## Racialized accumulation by dispossession

There are generally two opposing views of the crisis that
emerged in 1997 and remain unreconciled today. Should the
crisis be attributed to "crony capitalism" and flaws in the
economic systems in Asian countries, or to a series of
self-fulfilling prophecies, whereby foreign investors predicted
a crisis and then caused it by pulling out their funds in one
gigantic wave? The former view was put forth by the IMF and its
economists including Timothy Lanee, Atish Ghosh, Javier Hamann,
and Steven Phillips. This group asserts mainly that the drought
of investment renewals in 1997 was due to a lack of
transparency from the Korean, Thai, and Indonesian governments
and a justified view from investors from the information that
they did have that their investments would turn sour. The
opposing view is held by economists Jeffrey Sachs, Joseph
Stiglitz, Jason Furnan, and others, who argue that [fill
in]^[Also useful is to note that "nontransparency" from Asian
countries, as noted above in the case of Thailand, was often
held out of fear from governments that revealing their hand
would trigger a massive sell-off. The lack of transparency
seemed to fuel the collective withdrawal of investments, but
the alternative to these governments was to have disaster
strike.]

Among many other social and historical reasons, this division
still exists because both arguments have large elements of
truth and it is difficult to measure which side holds more
weight. It is uncontestable that the crisis itself arose as a
matter of a sudden fall in foreign confidence. On the flip
side, the most heavily struck states of Korea, Thailand, and
Indonesia did have heavy and often off-the-books relationships
between large corporations and the state that resulted in large
and unrestricted loans, in Korea through the infammous
family-run _chaebol_ groups and their champion
dictator-president Park Chung Hee. This undoubtedly did
contribute to the high debt-equity ratios in 1997, and could
also have made the precipitation of the crisis much worse.

Though this paper leans towards criticizng the herd behavior of
investors, my thesis is not an economic one, and it is not my
goal to conclusively prove which cause is greater or if the
investors predicted correctly given only the information they
had.

Until the crisis, Korea was seen to have undergone a harsh
period of state-fueled development that was just outside of the
logic posed by the capitalist West. This process was often
nicknamed "the miracle of the Han River," or its various
aliases including the "East Asian miracle" or the success of
the "Asian Tigers," all suggesting not only the perceived
economic success of Korea and its neighbors but how unexpected
they were. The success of these countries should not have
happened; they seemed supernatural and beyond reason, and it
should have been impossible for countries torn apart by war and
dictatorship to enter the same market and on a level playing
field as that of Western capitalist nations. To use the
language of da Silva, Korea was preconfigured as a nation of
improper economic subjects. To use the language of Alice
Amsden, prominent scholar of the "Asian Tigers," [quote form
asias next giant].

The converse effect of the miracle story is to obscure the
profoundly unmiraculous and violent processes that led to
economic success. Korea sent 300,000 troops to support the
United States during the Vietnam War, for which the United
States repaid through billions of dollars of economic
assistance and invaluable technological resources. Park Chung
Hee's police state consciously traded social rights for

This narrative of national failure rests on the commonly
recognized archetypes of the "model minority" and the "yellow
peril" deployed and extended at the national level, deemed here
as a status of "model modernity." The "seamless continuum," to
use Gary Okihiro's words, between the former two statuses form
a single challenge to the Western, white idea of success, one
that must be contained if peace were to be maintained. As
Okihiro writes, "the very indices of Asian American "success"
can imperil the good order of race relations when the margins
lay claim to the privileges of the mainstream." The model
modernity status extends this challenge to the international
level, posing "miracles" that emerged becasue

The onset of the crisis simultaneously shattered and fulfilled
this narrative. In the immediate sense, the crisis revealed
nations in Asia to have failed economically, ending the year
after year of unexpectedly high growth [find quote for this].
On the other hand and in the much more fundamental sense, that
failure was necessary for Western capitalism to triumphantly
unmask Korea's economic success as not a miracle but a facade
hidden by four decades of state intervention. The miracle of
Asian economic success had been seemingly defying the logic of
capital because it had in fact been too good to be true.

As I show above, the crisis formed not because of

- it was all narrative, not material underperformance
  - yung chul park and comparison to other countries (1
    paragraph)
  - chaebol crackdown leading to brief instability, not the
    chaebol itself (1 paragraph)
  - speculation and the self-fulfilling narrative (1 paragraph)
- their narrative had to be derived from something, it rests on
  preconditions that didn't just appear from nothing
  - ## asian tigers
  - model minority / model modernity
    - yellow peril <-> model minority
      - incomprehensible logic that is secondary to the logic
        of western capital
      - reducing into horde of workers
  - chaebol corporations
- these preconditions fueled the process of accumulation by
  dispossession
  - notably _not_ accumulation of capital, but accumulation of
