# Conclusion

If the IMF wishes us to learn one thing from the Asian
financial crisis, it's that there's no alternative but to be be
evaluated by "free market" capitalism and the interventionist
logic of the IMF. It's to believe that there was no alternative
for U.S. creditors but to pull out in the face of what appeared
to be an impending crash, that there was no alternative for the
IMF but to impose unprecedented economic burdens on Korea, that
there was no alternative but for Kim Dae-Jung's administration
to accept and begrudgingly implement these restrictions in
order for foreign investors to return. To believe that as
painful as they were, these steps were ultimately necessary to
save Korea from a precipitous fall.

I hope to push back on this defeatist perspective, through
deconstructing the above arguments as disingenous and a cover
for the same racial hierarchy of old, as shown above, but also
by pointing to alternatives to neverending reformism. It is
still an obvious truism that colonial political interests are
able to be upheld thanks to the power of its financial
institutions, a relationship that hurts most during times of
crises and often crippling instead of serving countries in
need. One might think of the U.S. sanctioning the French bank
BNP Paribas for $8.9 billion in 2014 for dealing with U.S.
enemies Sudan, Iran, and Cuba, a move that was only possible
because BNP Paribas relied on U.S. institutions to store and
move money.^[Most notably this includes the Fedwire system to
process and validate large payments like the kinds, which is
operated by the United States Federal Reserve.] More recently,
one can refer to the Biden Administration's unilateral decision
to freeze $9 billion owned by the Afghanistan central bank but
held in U.S. institutions and therefore subject to the whims of
the current regime. Neither of these events occurred through
any international law, but because of the reliance the world
has on U.S. banks.

But alternatives do exist. Russia and many countries in Asia
have been moving towards relying on a basket of currencies to
set the value of their own and to use in their national
reserves, moving away from the fragile reliance on the dollar
that led to financial ruin for Thailand and Indonesia
especially. China's Belt and Road Initiative has grown
massively over the past decade, accounting for upwards of a
trillion dollars of investment across nearly every continent
and presenting a major departure from the pattern of financing
from U.S. banks that preceded it. Some world leaders view these
emerging alliances as net goods; for example, while on a trip
to form an economic partnership with Russia and join the Belt
and Road Initiative, Argentinian President Alberto Fernandez
commented to Russian President Vladmir Putin:

> Since the 1990s, Argentina has been strongly oriented towards
> the United States. Argentina and its economy are largely
> dependent on the US and our relations with it. In fact, our
> debt to the IMF also emerged because of this relationship.
> [...] I am consistently working to rid Argentina of this
> dependence on the IMF and the US. I want Argentina to open up
> new opportunities. Cooperation with Russia is vital for
> us.^[@TalksPresidentArgentina]

Questions remain on whether the kinds of changes, however large
or dramatic they might appear, are sustainably moving the world
away from U.S. and IMF-mediated financial hegemony. Russia
invaded Ukraine less than a month after Fernandez made the
above statement, and countries like Argentina are experiencing
price hikes in wheat and other basic commodities due to
disruptions in trade with Russia.^[See
@nessiArgentinaInflationHotbed2022]. It is difficult to see
whether the economic and moral or political promises of the
Russia-Argentina trade relationships are real and will allow
Argentina can find economic prosperity outside of the IMF
hegemony. In other strategies to seek prosperity outside of
U.S. empire, El Salvador has adopted Bitcoin as a national
currency over the past year, partially for the freedom afforded
to the nation from relying on other countries' markets to price
their own currency. The IMF has strongly condemned this move,
arguing that El Salvador cannot regulate this currency at all
and the price of Bitcoin wildly
fluctuates.^[@livniUrgesSalvadorEnd2022]

Perhaps the largest of these alternate paths to economic
prosperity, China's massive Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), has
been extensively criticized in popular media as "neocolonial"
or simply imitating the dominance of empires past that force
nations into parasitic economic
relationships.^[@chandaNewColonialismChina;
@klevenBeltRoadColonialism; @singhBRI21stCentury2020;
@symonChinaBRINew2019] Many similarly accuse China of using the
BRI to set "debt traps," or provide loans and then seize
resources when debts cannot be repaid. One oft-repeated example
lies in the buyout of the Hambantota port in Sri Lanka by China
Merchants Port Holdings when a $7 billion loan could not be
repaid. Of course, China has committed none of the military
violence, has not taken over large territorial tracts in other
countries, or constructed a racial hierarchy or any other
social formation to drive forth its expansion of capital. And
in the case of the Hambantota port, debt to China constituted
only a small portion of Sri Lankan debt that forced Sri Lanka
to sell the port, the only two bidders for the port were from
Chinese companies, and the deal itself was in fact mandated by
an IMF structural adjustment program, all suggesting that China
perhaps did not manipulate Sri Lanka into entering debt in
order to obtain resources like the
port.^[@rithmireChineseDebtTrap2021, an extensively researched
article from The Atlantic, first convinced me of this
perspective.] Of course, this is just one deal of many, and it
would be impossible to sufficiently explore whether the BRI or
any other solution briefly mentioned above constitutes a true
challenge to the current dominance of U.S. capital.

All of the above is only to demonstrate that there are many
alternative promises to economic prosperity outside of
IMF-mediated Western financial hegemony, but it is difficult to
tell which or whether any of these are viable and sustainable.
Antonio Gramsci famously wrote that "the old world is dying and
the new world struggles to be born. Now is the time of
monsters." Scholarly, political, and popular criticism of the
IMF is plentiful, all yearning for a break from the tentacles
of Western liberal capitalism, struggling for a new world or at
least a new economic order to structure it. The current wave of
promised solutions appear to be full of these monsters; only
further critical and anticolonial scholarship with time can
reveal which promises are monsters are endemic to this
interregnum and which promises can bring forth that new world.
