# A brief history of the IMF

## Birth at Bretton Woods

Although the IMF was founded in 1944, the commitments behind
the IMF began some years prior. Most notable are the series of
agreements between the U.S. and Great Britain declaring their
allyship and vision of the world after World War II, beginning
with the Atlantic Charter in 1941. These included a right to
self-determination for all nations, a common goal towards
disarmament, and in economic terms a movement towards free
trade for all nations through prevention of tariffs and
currency devaluations. This emphasis on free trade for all
nations departed from the terms of the Paris Peace Conference
of 1919, which ended with economic punishment for Germany.
These restrictions have generally been regarded as leading to
the electoral success of the Nazi Party in the 1930s, and the
Allies in the negotiations after World War II thus wanted to
find a different path to peace, of which one component was an
all-inclusive economic order. From the outset, these promises
were incomplete and made unevenly, foreshadowing the lopsided
nature of the IMF's benefits when the economic promises would
give birth to it. Churchill in September 1941 argued that the
right to self-determination only applied to states of the
German empire, and despite a common goal towards disarmament,
the United States began amassing its nuclear arsenal before the
endof World War II.

After the Atlantic Charter of 1941, the two nations began
independently drafting what these ideals could amount to. On
the British side, prominent economist John Maynard Keynes took
on this task; on the American side, the US Treasury Department
official Harry White, at the discretion of Treasury Secretary
Henry Morgenthau, began drafting proposals. Though they had in
common the establishment of an international fund that could
assist the world during crises, the two proposals differed
especially on the use of an international standard currency and
through which nations such a system would benefit. At the heart
of White's proposal was the establishment of the the dollar
standard. Under this system, the U.S. Treasury would use
economic policy to maintain the value of the dollar at $35
dollars for one ounce of gold, and all nations had to fix their
currencies to the United States dollar through fixed exchange
rates. "Fixing" would occur by each nation guaranteeing trade
for any interested party of its currency for the U.S. dollar or
gold at the fixed price, and vice versa. It would be up to the
central banks of each nation to implement fiscal policy such
that this would not become so bad of a deal as to bankrupt the
state, so the system was a constant counterplay of a
set-in-stone rule and dynamic state policy. This departed from
the previous standard of gold alone, which White felt was
valuable in unifying currencies into a single system but
required an alternative in case countries' gold reserves
temporarily ran low. America's large gold reserves at the time,
along with its otherwise dominant economy, and of course
White's own allegiance as a United States official, led him to
argue for the U.S. dollar as a complement to the gold standard.
To match the dollar-gold duo standard, and cement its
stability, White proposed a "Stabilization Fund;" when a
country did not have enough of either currency to pay its
international payments, it could draw from this fund to avoid
an international crisis.^[@boughtonNewBrettonWoods2009;
@boughtonSilentRevolutionInternational2001;
@steilBattleBrettonWoods2013]

Keynes' proposal differed quite a bit. While White had a high
level of respect for the gold standard of the prewar era,
Keynes instead called the gold standard a "barbarous relic."
For every country to value their currency in terms of gold
would mean any given country could not immediately devalue its
own currency, as that would mean devaluing the gold supply that
other countries held. A country would thus be unable to slow
down drastic inflationary periods by deflating its currency and
vice versa, a restriction that ran antithetical to Keynes' more
general belief in fiscal policy to regulate the market. Keynes'
proposal thus focused on an International Clearing Bank that
handled all international transactions, and these transactions
would occur in terms of "bank money" as currency (and later
_bancor_, or French for "bank gold"). The new bank would mean a
central party to always ensure two countries could trade with
each otheThusr even if they lacked the other's currency or the
equivalent amount of gold, and the new currency in particular
would not vary according to mining technology and national
policies as gold did. Finally, Keynes' proposal differed from
White's in emphasizing growth over stabilization, and included
intervention schemes for both chronic debtors and creditor
countries. White did not make any similar suggestion, given the
U.S.' interests as the world's foremost financial power would
be simply to keep that spot and to lend to other countries as
much as it desired.^[@steilBattleBrettonWoods2013, 71-78]

These proposals met in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire in
July 1944. The conference had broad goals to establish
international standards for finance and trade, which translated
to three specific commissions at the conference. The first
commission, headed by the United States' Harry Dexter White,
set out to establish the International Monetary Fund. The
second, headed by Britain's John Maynard Keynes, was meant to
establish the funding arm of the World Bank, which would be
called the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD). The third commission essentially captured
everything else, and was chaired by the Mexican Minister of
Finance Eduardo Suarez.^[@blinderEightStepsNew1999]

Officials from forty-four nations arrived at the Bretton Woods
conference debated on the postwar financial order, but the
majority of the conference was led by the United States and
Britain, and the conference in turn became a compromise between
Harry White and John Maynard Keynes' proposals described above.
The Bretton Woods conference had itself emerged as a successor
to the earlier Atlantic Conference between the U.S. and
Britain, a fact that was reflected in everything from the two
major powers chairing the two major commissions of the
conference to the location and attendance of the parties
involved (the United States had almost three times as many
officials present as Britain, which sent the second-most
delegates). But among the two powers, the United States had the
higher strategic hand, because the commission Britain was
chairing had nearly all of its terms already agreed upon by
member nations. The United States also was in a much better
place financially than Britain was in 1944, as it had even
profited from the war effort before joining the war effort in
December 1941.

The impact of this balance of the conference's deciding power
led to the new financial order reflecting mostly that of Harry
Dexter White. The logistics of both the IMF and the IBRD
favored the United States by being headquartered in Washington.
Much more consequentially, the world now operated on White's
proposed dollar-gold standard, wherein the U.S. sell bonds for
gold at $35/ounce and thus have a financial impetus to fix the
dollar to that amount, else they would lose money quickly. The
newly-created IMF would be directed to intervene only in cases
of financial crises, and neither the IMF or IBRD would have the
power to mint currency as Keynes' favored bank
would.^[@steilBattleBrettonWoods2013, 196] All of these
functions would be left to lending institutions in member
countries, which over the next forty years would favor American
banks. Such an imbalance was very, very good for American
institutions' profitability, but would eventually lead to
heaping piles of debt that would provoke the Latin American
debt crisis of the 1980s and the Asian financial crisis
of 1997. It would also lead to American dollars being pumped in
large quantities all across the globe, which would prove
unsustainable later in the 1970s for the maintenance of the
dollar-gold standard and would lead American to eject from this
arrangement in 1973.^[@blinderEightStepsNew1999]

The Bretton Woods accords were not received well by every
country. The Soviet Union first submitted several amendments to
White's plan including discounts and special loans for
reconstruction of war-torn nations, and designated procedures
for countries with state-controlled foreign trade (like the
Soviet Union). The Russian delegation also pushed for its
participation in setting the exchange rate of its currency.
This was cast as an independent check on the American and
British interests, given that really no other party had a major
voice in the conference. Even after signing the agreement at
the Bretton Woods conference, the Soviet Union refused to
ratify the Bretton Woods agreement when the time came in
December 1945. And despite positive exchanges between the
Soviet and American delegations at the conference itself, a
Soviet representative would charge in 1947 at a United Nations
conference that the IMF and the World Bank were merely
"branches of Wall Street."^[@pechatnovSovietUnionBretton2017]

The other major point of tension with regards to
capitalist-communist cooperation was Harry Dexter White
himself. White sympathized strongly with the programs of the
Soviet Union, and had even stated in 1919 that "Russia is the
first instance of a socialist economy in action. And it
works!"^[@steilBattleBrettonWoods2013, 6] He pushed for better
relations with the Russian delegation during the conference
itself, sending multiple complements to the delegation that
were eventually wired to Moscow that praised their "excellent
leadership" and that "Soviet experts have been most cooperative
and have shown high technical competence and a thorough
understanding of the
proposals."^[@pechatnovSovietUnionBretton2017, 96] Many
scholars believe that this is far from a simple admiration; in
1950, two years after White's death, evidence was first
revealed suggesting that White had acted as an informant for
the Soviet Union for many years, even passing them plates to
print Allied currency in postwar Germany and obstructing a $200
million U.S. loan to Nationalist China under the direction of
the Soviet Union. These claims began as early as 1939, several
years before White architected the new financial order, and
began seriously taking hold in 1947, leading him to resign from
his role as Director of the IMF. White died in 1948, and the
FBI confirmed his role as a Soviet spy through the Venon
project in 1950.^[The documents used to do so were only
revealed in late 90s after a Congressional investigation]

Despite these claims of espionage, White was not really a
Communist, least of all in the policies he fought for. His
proposal strongly benefited American banks that could lend or
hold dollars for other nations, and U.S. monetary policy that
could simply print more dollars as would benefit American
corporations during deflationary periods (other countries could
not print dollars). Because of this, he arguably did more for
American international capitalism than nearly any other person
during the World War II era. White seemed to have a very
specific vision of what the postwar era should look like -- a
single, harmonious global order led by American capital and
regulated by the monetary policy of the U.S. Treasury, where
the Soviet Union would be among its strongest allies in both
trade and diplomacy. These can be seen in his non-confidential
writings, for example when he argued to the Bureau of Engraving
and Printing that the Soviet Union "must be trusted to the same
degree as the other allies," and for this reason should be
given U.S. plates.^[@steilBattleBrettonWoods2013, 273]
Historians like James Boughton, former official historian of
the IMF, still believe that this was all White stood for, and
that he never committed treason or espionage on behalf of the
Soviet Union.^[@boughtonHarryWhiteAmerican2022;
@steilLonelyCrusadeIMF2013.]

Due to the breakdown of U.S.-Soviet relations after World War
II, the IMF and the Bretton Woods system never really served
White's ideal version of a keystone of a unified, widely
accepted, and fair economic system. After Harry Truman ascended
to U.S. Presidency, U.S. policies regarding the IMF moved from
the Treasury Department to the State Department, and in general
the U.S. regime began marching its way into the Cold War. In
1950, Poland withdrew, then in 1954, Czechoslovakia withdrew
from the IMF. The U.S. government would block the entry of the
People's Republic of China.^[@boughtonIMFForceHistory2004] Only
three countries from Africa and zero countries from Asia were
among the original members of the IMF. Delegations from India
and China did argue for pro-development mandates for the IMF
and greater assistance for colonies and former colonies from
the IMF, but the nations of the Third World for the most part
did not have a voice represented at the conference, and most
still had not obtained their
independence.^[@franczakAsiaBrettonWoods2017. Also of note here
is that even India at the Bretton Woods Conference was still
two years away from official recognition of its independence by
the United Kingdom. India was the only colony at the
conference.] Even the term "Third World" would not be coined by
Alfred Sauvy until five years after the financial order was
developed.

To conclude, though there were some mild attempts at
international cooperation, the Bretton Woods system clearly
represented the interests of only a few, being born out mostly
out of the United States' and to a lesser extent Britain's
interests. The efforts of any individuals to make an
cooperative international system to assist in development were
still fundamentally to build a world order benefiting the
dollar and U.S. interests. The IMF, the World Bank, and the
world's financial standards in general were forged at the
behest of the United States, while excluding half of the world
outright and causing some tension with those who had other
interests. White's vision of an American-led unified financial
order would not take hold for some time. He would have to
settle for an American-led fragmented world order instead.

## The end of the dollar standard

Conflict over the Bretton Woods system did not just occur
between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. Some European nations
were opposed to the dollar standard because their economies
grew past what the Bretton Woods system had assumed. West
Germany's economy had grown in large amounts since the end of
World War II, and its currency increased in value sharply until
monetary policy was not enough to keep it at its original rate
to the dollar. So West Germany became the first to leave the
system, announcing that they would no longer hold their
currency to the U.S. dollar.^[@eichengreen2011;
@serranoStaticGoldFloating2003] Other countries objected to the
use of the dollar standard as unfairly benefiting the United
States, with the French Finance Minister Valéry Giscard
d’Estaing famously complaining of this as America's "exorbitant
privilege."^[See @eichengreen2011 for a discussion of this
term. Eichengreen's text backs up much of this section.] The
dollar standard helped establish the U.S. dollar as the world's
reserve currency, or a single currency through which all
international trade was made. A common language for trade was
the de facto standard for all nations, as it would require much
more work to produce and manage separate exchange systems
across every possible combination of currencies. Under White's
version of Bretton Woods, the dollar became the peg that
nations had to maintain, and most nations also took the dollar
as their reserve currency partially because that they were
already prepared to exchange their currencies for it.^[Under
Keynes' system, this would have been the stateless "bank money"
or _bancor_ as explained above. Also, "partially" here is
because while the dollar standard helped cement the reserve
currency practice, the elephant in the room is the dominance of
the U.S. economy itself that made the dollar appear safer than
other currency.] Politicians like d'Estaing found this reserve
currency status distateful, because while France and other
countries had to produce and sell goods to the U.S. or another
dollar-holding country to obtain dollars, the U.S. began with a
massive coffer of dollars and had the sovereign power to print
more dollars as needed.^[On one hand, it's a little more
complicated than that, as the U.S. was obligated to maintain
the dollar-gold ratio at $35 per ounce, and printing endless
amounts of dollars would drive that down. On the other hand, as
explained in the following paragraph, this essentially happened
after the U.S. injected so many dollars into the world economy
that the value of the dollar went down and the U.S. was forced
to reckon with this in 1973.]

France was also worried by postwar developments and U.S.
spending after the war, which through postwar spendiing pumped
so many dollars into the world economy that the amount of
dollars in circulation eventually overtook the dollar value of
U.S.-held gold. This meant that the dollar was worth less than
what the nominal $35 per ounce rate might suggest, and this was
soon evidenced when the private gold market showed gold as
worth $40/ounce in
1960.^[@debeaufortwijnholdsGoldDollarWatergate2015, 44] The
rate to buy gold from the U.S. state at $35/ounce was therefore
attractive, as it was less than what gold was actually worth.
Despite some policy attempts to reverse this trend, eventually
Switzerland and then France opted to convert their dollars to
gold. General Secretary of the Soviet Union Leonid Brezhnev
commented that this series of developments reflected "the
possibility of a profound crisis of the capitalist
system."^[@eichengreen2011, 65]

The Nixon adminstration saw these developments and realized
that the Bretton Woods dollar-gold standard was falling apart.
In August 1971, Nixon made a radio address, stating that his
administration had previously been concerned with ending the
Vietnam War, and "because of the progress [the United States
has] made toward achieving that goal, this Sunday evening is an
appropriate time for us to turn our attention to the challenges
of peace."^[@nixonPublicMessagesSpeeches1971] Among the
challenges of peace, to Nixon, was to reign in the inflationary
nature of the U.S. dollar by ending the international
convertibility of U.S. dollars to gold at the fixed $35/ounce.
This would in effect remove the U.S. from the gold standard and
let it "float" instead, having its value fluctuate according to
the market. Floating the dollar would allow the U.S. Treasury
to adopt more aggressive anti-inflation policies, including the
90-day freeze on wages and prices that Nixon called for along
in this same address. The "Nixon shock," for it was made
suddenly and unilaterally by the Nixon administration, echoed
throughout the world, and countries around the world began
worrying about their own currencies that had previously seemed
stable under the dollar-gold duo standard system. European
nations moved to tie their currencies together and avoid the
newly unstable dollar, while other nations created "baskets" of
currencies involving their largest trading partners, and still
others maintained a strong peg to the U.S. dollar. This
continued peg would become partially responsible for the Asian
financial crisis as elaborated below. For the United States,
the shock ended up pushing the United States into a period of
"stagflation" in the 1970s, involving a drop in the dollar's
value by a third.^[@caryStrainedAllianceUSEuropean2011. Nixon's
speech has a bit of irony seen readily with some critical
retrospection. His speech seems to suggest that the war is
going so well that it is time to succeed just as well in the
domestic economy, but both the Vietnam War and the Nixon shock
would become two of Nixon's biggest failures.]

A side effect of the unpopularity of the dollar at the time was
the introduction of the Special Drawing Right (SDR) as the
official currency of the IMF in 1969. It seemed that both the
dollar and gold faced issues of scarcity that made them more
unstable than the IMF accounts should be, if they were
theoretically a diverse pool of resources from all over the
world. The value of the SDR would attempt to reflect that pool
of resources, being originally given value from the value of 16
currencies of the world's largest economies.^[Today the formula
for the value of the SDR only includes five currencies.]
Although the SDR worked in giving the IMF an alternative
currency to use, it was limited in use compared to an
international currency. It could only be used with the IMF and
especially not with private parties, the allocation of SDRs was
always subject to IMF approval, and the dollar still remained
in most nations' coffers as the dominant reserve currency of
the world.^[@boughtonHistorySDR1996]

Thus, the IMF emerged mostly unscathed from the end of the
dollar-gold standard. Bretton Woods fell, but the IMF lived on.

## The emergence of conditionality

The other major development the IMF underwent during this era
was the solidification of its policy of conditionality.
Conditionality, or the set of conditions that a country must
agree to in order to receive a loan from the IMF, was not part
of the original IMF as established in the Bretton Woods
agreement. This was not to say that the original IMF functioned
solely as a fund that member nations could draw from freely, as
it was mandated to prevent nations from running large trade
deficits or surpluses in order to avoid economic crises. The
policy of conditionality established later differed in being
not a blanket set of regulations for all, but specifically
targeting countries that requested loans from the IMF.
Countries that requested loans from the IMF were now subject to
disciplinary rules and special standards.

This officially began in February 1952 during an Executive
Board meeting. The Managing Director would cautiously frame the
Fund's resolution by stating that

> [E]ven at the outset I think it must be clear that access to
> the Fund should not be denied because a member is in
> difficulty. On the contrary, the task of the Fund is to help
> members that need temporary help, and requests should be
> expected from members that are in trouble in greater or
> lesser degree.
> ^[@internationalmonetaryfundMeetingNotesExecutive1952, 2]

These were finally set into metaphorical stone in 1969, when
the IMF Articles of Agreement were amended for the first time.
The IMF was ready to say that as part of its core duties, it
would "adopt policies on the use of its resources that will
assist members to solve their balance of payments problems ...
and that will establish adequate safeguards for the temporary
use of its resources."

In other words, the Fund was meant to try its best to give
loans freely, and the regulations attached should not
specifically target those nations in need. In this meeting
other officials would similarly express caution over these
regulations, for example blocking the Fund from requiring
short-term repurchase agreements and even a requirement for
nations to provide a written statement agreeing with the
"principles" of a lending decision.^[A repurchase agreement
involves one party selling securities and purchasing them back
at another date. This could function as collateral in the case
of the IMF; a nation would give the IMF a security as
collateral for cash.] Besides these sentiments, the IMF did not
extensively restrict or specify the types of conditions that
could be attached, with the Managing Director stating that "it
would be too much to expect that we should be able to solve
with one stroke the entire problem of access to the Fund's
resources ... We shall have to feel our
way."^[@internationalmonetaryfundMeetingNotesExecutive1952, 4]

Despite the cautious sentiments about the IMF's power, "feeling
its way" meant negotiating these policies with each country for
each crisis, and the IMF as a financially and politically
powerful institution often had the upper hand in these
negotiations. Countries in crisis, especially countries with
smaller economies and less external resources, needed loans
from the IMF more than the IMF "needed" any country. The IMF
did feel its way through the conditionality issue over decades
of practice, but it would eventually veer towards more
conditions, more stringent conditions, and conditions birthed
from the limited-government stnaces advocated for during the
1980s.

The prime example of these can be seen in the IMF's response to
the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s, the most severe
and widespread economic crisis in Latin American history and
the largest test of the IMF's aid programs. Before the crisis,
the IMF's policies of conditionality were undoubtedly known and
common. But after the crisis, when the IMF had to not only
negotiate between a country but conduct a set of negotiations
across an entire continent, these policies began to consolidate
into a canon. These policies had cohered into a set of
principles that John Williamson would famously call the
Washington Consensus in
1989.^[@mccleeryWashingtonConsensusPostmortem2008;
@williamsonWashingtonConsensus1990] In other words, through
practice, a single set of principles would dominate over
others.

The crisis began building from economic activity of the 1970s.
As Latin American countries underwent large development
campaigns, they took out large loans from American banks.
American banks saw these campaigns as relatively safe
investments and therefore lent them money. An element of
doing-as-others-did was at play here; as large banks gave loans
to Latin American countries, other banks felt it was safe to do
the same. Brazil, Chile, Argentina, Peru, and Mexico especially
began building large amounts of foreign debt. Debt to foreign
creditors began at $29 billion in 1970, but by 1982 Latin
American nations owed $327 billion dollars -- an increase of
over 1000% percent in ten
years.^[@boughtonSilentRevolutionInternational2001] Economist
Jeffrey Sachs noted at the time that for nine major U.S. banks,
the total amount loaned to Latin American countries totaled
almost three times their
capital.^[@sachsInternationalPolicyCoordination1987]

Around the same time, partially due to Nixon's move to end the
Bretton Woods system as described above, the world underwent a
period of "stagflation" that involved a continued increase in
currency value but rising unemployment and stagnant economic
output. In 1980, U.S. Secretary of Treasury Paul Volcker began
a recovery campaign from this recession through anti-inflation
measures, which meant increased interest rates on U.S. loans to
other nations towards a general campaign to push down the value
of the U.S. dollar. The "Volcker shock" resulted in a tamed
inflation rate for the United States, but also a global
contraction of trade. Latin American countries that depended
heavily on trade were hit hard, as their exports dropped
dramatically in value.^[@devlinGreatLatinAmerican1994]

The trend in accumulating debt for a decade suddenly became
unstable because of this. U.S. banks began ending the trend of
refinancing expiring loans, making countries scramble to pay
loans back. Even Latin American countries that did not
experience this issue had to continue depleting their reserves
to pay heightened interest payments, which reached over 18%
near their peak in 1981.^[@pastorLatinAmericaDebt1989, 89] And
these continued depletions could not be matched by exports to
adequately replenish a country's reserves, as these exports
fell in value due to the economic ripples of the Volcker shockn
value due to the economic ripples of the Volcker shock.

Eventually, the mountain of debt began to fall. In August 12th,
1982, Mexican Finance Minister Jesús Silva Herzog announced
that Mexico could no longer pay its debt, beginning a 90-day
moratorium on loan payments and requesting a restructuring of
its loans so that they could be paid. Silva Herzog, U.S.
Secretary of Treasury Paul Volcker, and IMF Managing Director
Jacques de Larosière began immediately coordinating a financing
plan to prevent the crisis from escalating any further. Mexico
would implement the IMF's prescribed adjustment program, in
exchange for about $1.3 billion from the IMF, $925 million each
from the Bank of International Settlements and the U.S.
government, and about $5 billion from a staggering 526
commercial banks. In March 3rd, 1983, the agreement was signed,
and in March 15th, the last of 526 partnering banks finished
signing this agreement. Other countries followed suit over the
next three years, some because they were in the same position
as Mexico and others because panicking banks ended the trend of
refinancing and their had to immediately be paid. One by one,
the IMF began arranging deals with
governments.^[@boughtonSilentRevolutionInternational2001]

For Mexico, this meant increasing the price of gasoline,
eliminating the fixed "preferential" exchange rate that Mexico
used for essential goods to ensure that they could always be
bought, and a cut of the national fiscal deficit from 16.5
percent to 8.5 percent of the countries' GDP. For Brazil, this
meant similarly meant reducing the borrowing requirement from
14% of the GDP to 8% by 1983, preventing wage increases, and
steadily devaluing the _cruzeiro_. Other countries' experiences
took after Mexico, Brazil, and Argentina's (Latin America's
three largest economies at the time) experiences here, all of
these prescriptions oriented towards quickly increasing
governments' ability to pay off debt by cutting its expenses,
and in the process convincing foreign creditors that remaining
in these countries was safe.

These requirements were strict and resulted in many countries
slashing public funding that in fact made the crisis worse,
requiring a second set of bailouts in the second half of the
1980s. But these conditions were still relatively cautious,
because most discussion around conditionality at the time tried
to limit its role. In 1979, speakers at the IMF's Annual
Meeting argued that IMF loan packages be greatly increased in
size and be given with fewer conditions, which Managing
Director Jacques de Larosière encouraged his senior staff to
do. Ariel Buira, a Director at the IMF from Mexico, would in
1981 lambast arguments for conditionality cutting down on
debtor nations' government programs, saying that:

> This [argument for conditionality] is a nice 19th century
> liberal conception in which the state has a purely regulatory
> role and no development responsibilities, but surely one on
> which the Fund's 140 odd member countries may have their own
> views. I know that my authorities do not expect Fund guidance
> on this matter.^[@buiraStatementMrBuira1981]

For Buira, this view was simplistic and contradictory. How
could proponents of limited government argue that the IMF
should have expanded conditionality? Buira would go on in this
statement to suggest that the practice of conditionality be
placed under a formal review, given that the IMF's current
case-by-case basis put debtor countries' prescribed packages at
the whims of IMF staff.

But despite Buira and others' protests, the IMF would expand
conditionality to cover structural reforms over the next few
years. The initial set of credit lines with limited
conditionality in the early 1980s proved to be a failure, with
most countries still lacking funds by 1985 to pay back their
debts. IMF staffers and creditor nations began pushing for
stronger conditions in hopes that the money they had invested
could be recovered. The review that Buira had advocated for
supported structural reforms when it was published in 1986.
More broadly, U.S. President Reagan's popularity meant advocacy
of limited government became the norm rather than an exception.

In 1985, U.S. Secretary of Treasury James Baker would introduce
a new recovery package that became known as the Baker Plan.
This strategy would involve a refinancing of current debts, a
shift from short-term to long-term loans, and as opposed to
simpler fiscal austerity requirements, would also require
structural adjustments like focusing on exports of raw
materials. In blunt terms, this plan also did not work. Latin
American countries continued to default on their loans. A
different strategy was needed, as it became increasingly clear
that many countries would not be able to pay back their loans
no matter how hard they were pushed. In 1989, seven years after
the crisis had formally begun, U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas
Brady would introduce the Brady Plan as a final attempt to stop
the crisis. The Brady Plan allowed creditor banks to switch
their loans to tradable and discounted bonds, essentially
letting banks with large investments in Latin American
countries offload a portion to other banks, and in doing so
become less cautious about investing again in Latin America.
With renewed foreign investors' confidence, the crisis was
finally over.^[@devlinGreatLatinAmerican1994;
@greenLatinAmericaNeoliberal1996]

Buira has described conditionality at best as "paternalism, by
which a country is guided towards its own good, rather like a
parent or a teacher guides a child in its own best interests,"
and at worst "elements that are unnecessary to overcoming the
[Latin American] payments
crisis."^[@buiraAnalysisIMFConditionality2003] One may harken
back to paternal justifications for empire of the sovereign
kind, for everything from James Kipling's _The White Man's
Burden_ to Churchill's insistence on denying Indian citizens of
their independence. Implicit in the assumptions of both
justifications lie that those who enforce these conditions know
best, but "know best" always happens to benefit the enforcer
much more than the debtor country. These standards even overlap
in scope, with both "old" colonial empires and the new reign of
the IMF converting dependent nations into export-oriented
economies.

Unlike the regimes of empires past, the logic of the IMF
operates singularly on an economic discourse without making
reference to race or to the character of the subjects in the
dependent nation. The deployment of conditionality nonetheless
illustrates how these values are formed across racial lines, or
in other words how the presumption of racial difference allows
the supposedly universal logic of conditionally to be
differentially applied. The Latin American nations experiencing
the debt crisis were punished for the fall of their mountain of
debt, with no similar discipline being applied to the creditor
banks in the United States. If anything, the Baker and Brady
plans focused on restructuring debt so that creditor banks
could have their loans repaid by transferring them to bonds and
other lending institutions, in other words easing the burden of
banks while dragging on the burden of debtor countries.

This thesis is not an economic one, so the point of this
perspective on conditionality is not to prove or disprove the
effect of any particular condition on any particular economic
outcome. Rather, I hope it is plainly obvious how the IMF is
not a lending fund that countries may use during times of
crisis but an enforcer of those policies essential to the
contemporary capitalist world order, and further how older
structures of empire have been reworked for the modern day by
institutions like the IMF. The mechanisms of this continuance
is visible in a multitude of ways, for example in the kinds of
standards that are enforced in both types of regimes and who
they benefit, but this thesis' main focus lies in the
assumptions behind these standards and how the standards
ultimately force these assumptions to be fulfilled.

## The IMF, version 1.0

The IMF received much criticism for its handling of the Latin
American crisis. But the IMF, if anything, was strengthened
after the Latin American debt crisis. IMF economists and
IMF-organized conferences produced volumes of writing
justifying the high-conditionality of the debt crisis, and the
policies of conditionality til today have not fundamentally
changed even to today. The enforcement of conditions during
this era set a precedent for future intervention with a more
cohesive set of policies, constituting the controversial
"Washington Consensus" as formulated by John Williamson.

The emergence of this set of policies was the culmination of
the transformation set in motion in the 60s. The IMF originally
ensured that the fixed exchange rates of the Bretton Woods
system remained stable by providing liquidity to countries
before their currencies could fall precipitously. After the
Nixon shock of 1973, the IMF no longer served as the funding
complement to a system of monetary policies, and instead began
implementing economic policies itself, policies which were
defined through great detail in the Latin American debt crisis
of the 1980s. In doing so, it gained authority to discipline
and practice exercising that power.

Despite such a change, the IMF at its roots was preserved.
Explicitly, the IMF was still meant to preserve financial
stability through regulating all nations' monetary systems.
Implicitly, the policies of the IMF were still constructed by
and benefited banks in creditor nations, most consistently the
United States. And while the IMF was never a sovereign power,
its policies always held onto forces that made them hegemonic,
either because of the dominance of the United States after
World War II or the desperation states faced during economic
crises that forced them to take the hand the IMF dealt them.
Thus, even while outliving the original Bretton Woods
agreement's dollar-gold financial standard, the political
currents that gave birth to it in 1945 still held strong in
1973 and stronger still after the Latin American debt crisis.
Rather than depart from those currents and embark on new ones,
the IMF was even armed with the framework of conditionality to
do as those first currents desired.

Historian James Boughton calls the 1980s the "silent
revolution" for this change in the IMF's role to administer
policies. I view these changes not as a revolution or a radical
shift in role, but as a _maturation_. After thirty years and
many pivots, the IMF finally had policies, experiences, and
mandates to fulfill the spirit of its original mission. It now
had precedents it could iterate on to quickly deploy policies
in future interventions. When future iterventions were
criticized, the IMF responses in the Latin American debt crises
ccould be used to illustrate the "necessity" for strong
conditionality. The technology of conditionality that the IMF
had engineered had some tumultuous beginnings, but they
nonetheless had been adopted as conclusive practice. Just as
the mountains of debt that would result in the Asian financial
crisis began piling up, it seemed that the IMF, version 1.0,
had been released.
