# A brief history of the IMF

## First steps, first visions

Although the IMF was founded in 1944, the commitments behind
the IMF began some years prior. Most notably are the series of
agreements between the U.S. and Great Britain declaring their
allyship and vision of the world after World War II, beginning
with the Atlantic Charter in 1941. These included a right to
self-determination for all nations (though Churchill in
September 1941 argued that this only applied to states of the
German empire), a common goal towards disarmament, and in
economic terms a movement towards free trade for all nations
through prevention of tariffs and currency devaluations. This
emphasis on free trade for all nations departed from the terms
of the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, which ended with
economic punishment for Germany. These restrictions have
generally been regarded as leading to the electoral success of
the Nazi Party in the 1930s, and the Allies in the negotiations
after World War II thus wanted to find a different path to
peace.

After the Atlantic Charter of 1941, the two nations began
independently drafting what these ideals could amount to. On
the British side, prominent economist John Maynard Keynes took
on this task; on the American side, the US Treasury Department
official Harry White, at the discretion of Treasury Secretary
Henry Morgenthau, began drafting proposals. Though they had in
common the establishment of an international fund that could
assist the world during crises, the

At the heart of White's proposal was the establishment of the
the dollar standard. Under this system, the U.S. Treasury would
use economic policy to maintain the value of the dollar at $35
dollars for one ounce of gold, and all nations had to fix their
currencies to the United States dollar through fixed exchange
rates. This departed from the previous standard of gold alone,
which White felt was valuable in unifying currencies into a
single system but required an alternative in case countries'
gold reserves temporarily ran low. America's large gold
reserves at the time, along with its otherwise dominant
economy, and of course White's own allegiance as a United
States official, led him to argue for the U.S. dollar as a
complement to the gold standard. To match the dollar-gold duo
standard, and cement its stability, White proposed a
"Stabilization Fund;" when a country did not have enough of
either currency to pay its international payments, it could
draw from this fund to avoid an international crisis.

The dollar standard would

Keynes' proposal differed quite a bit. While White had a high
level of respect for the gold standard of the prewar era,
Keynes instead called the gold standard a "barbarous relic."
For every country to value their currency in terms of gold
would mean any given country could not immediately devalue its
own currency, as that would mean devaluing the gold supply that
other countries held. A country would thus be unable to slow
down drastic inflationary periods by deflating its currency and
vice versa, a restriction that ran antithetical to Keynes' more
general belief in fiscal policy to regulate the market. Keynes'
proposal thus focused on an International Clearing Bank that
handled all international transactions, and these transactions
would occur in terms of "bank money" as currency (and later
_bancor_, or French for "bank gold"). The new bank would mean a
central party to always ensure two countries could trade with
each otheThusr even if they lacked the other's currency or the
equivalent amount of gold, and the new currency in particular
would not vary according to mining technology and national
policies as gold could.

These proposals met in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire in
July 1944. The conference had broad goals to establish
international standards for finance and trade, which translated
to three specific commissions at the conference. The first
commission, headed by the United States' Harry Dexter White,
set out to establish the International Monetary Fund. The
second, headed by Britain's John Maynard Keynes, was meant to
establish the funding arm of the World Bank, which would be
called the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD). The third commission essentially captured
everything else, and was chaired by the Mexican Minister of
Finance Eduardo Suarez.

Officials from 44 nations arrived at the Bretton Woods
conference debated on the postwar financial order, but the
majority of the conference was led by the United States and
Britain, and the conference in turn became a compromise between
Harry White and John Maynard Keynes' proposals described above.
The Bretton Woods conference had itself emerged as a successor
to the earlier Atlantic Conference between the U.S. and
Britain, a fact that was reflected in everything from the two
major powers chairing the two major commissions of the
conference to the location and attendance of the parties
involved (the United States had almost three times as many
officials present as Britain, which sent the second-most
delegates). But among the two powers, the United States had the
higher strategic hand, because the commission Britain was
chairing had nearly all of its terms already agreed upon by
member nations. The United States also was in a much better
place financially than Britain was in 1944, as it had even
profited from the war effort before joining the war effort in
December 1941.

The impact of this balance of the conference's deciding power
led to the new financial order reflecting mostly that of Harry
Dexter White. (elaborate).

Firstly, the logistics of both the IMF and the IBRD favored the
United States by being headquartered in Washington, D.C.

These results were not received well by every country. The
Soviet Union first submitted several amendments to White's plan
including discounts and special loans for reconstruction of
war-torn nations, and designated procedures for countries with
state-controlled foreign trade (like the Soviet Union). The
Russian delegation also pushed for its participation in setting
the exchange rate of its currency. These pushes were cast as an
independent check on the American and British interests, given
that really no other party had a major voice in the conference.
Even after signing the agreement at the Bretton Woods
conference, the Soviet Union refused to ratify the Bretton
Woods agreement when the time came in December 1945. And
despite positive exchanges between the Soviet and American
delegations at the conference itself, a Soviet representative
would charge in 1947 at a United Nations conference that the
IMF and the World Bank were merely "branches of Wall Street."

The other major development with regards to
capitalist-communist cooperation was Harry Dexter White
himself. White had even stated in 1919 that "Russia is the
first instance of a socialist economy in action. And it works!"
[cite from battle of bretton woods page 6], and pushed for
better relations with the Russian delegation during the
conference itself. He sent multiple complements to the
delegation that were eventually wired to Moscow, praising them
for "excellent leadership" and that "Soviet experts have been
most cooperative and have shown high technical competence and a
thorough understanding of the proposals." [soviet union and the
bretton woods conf pg 96]. In 1950, two years after White's
death, it was revealed that White had acted as an informant for
the Soviet Union for many years, even passing them plates to
print Allied currency in postwar Germany and obstructing a $200
million U.S. loan to Nationalist China under the direction of
the Soviet Union. These claims began as early as 1939, several
years before White architected the new financial order, and
began seriously taking hold in 1947, leading him to resign from
his role as Director of the IMF. White died in 1948, and the
FBI confirmed his role as a Soviet spy through the Venon
project in 1950.^[The documents used to do so were only
revealed in late 90s after a Congressional investigation]

Despite these claims of espionage, White was not really a
Communist, least of all in the policies he fought for. His
proposal strongly benefited American banks that could lend or
hold dollars for other nations, and U.S. monetary policy that
could simply print more dollars as would benefit American
corporations during deflationary periods (other countries could
not print dollars). Because of this, he arguably did more for
American international capitalism than nearly any other person
during the World War II era. White seemed to have a very
specific vision of what the postwar era should look like -- a
single, harmonious global order led by American capital and
regulated by the monetary policy of the U.S. Treasury, where
the Soviet Union would be among its strongest allies in both
trade and diplomacy. These can be seen in his non-confidential
writings, for example when he argued to the Bureau of Engraving
and Printing that the Soviet Union "must be trusted to the same
degree as the other allies," and for this reason should be
given U.S. plates. [273]

Due to the breakdown of U.S.-Soviet relations after World War
II, the IMF and the Bretton Woods system never really served
this purpose. After Harry Truman ascended to U.S. Presidency,
U.S. policies regarding the IMF moved from the Treasury
Department to the State Department, and in general the U.S.
regime began marching its way into the Cold War. In 1950,
Poland withdrew, then in 1954, Czechoslovakia withdrew from the
IMF. The U.S. government would block the entry of the People's
Republic of China.^[@boughtonIMFForceHistory2004] Only three
countries from Africa and zero countries from Asia were among
the original members of the IMF. White's vision of an
American-led unified financial order would not take hold for
some time. He would have to settle for an American-led
fragmented world order instead.

[check out soviet participation details at Harry Dexter White
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-60891-4.pdf]

To conclude, though there were some mild attempts at
international cooperation, the Bretton Woods system clearly
represented the interests of only a few, being born out mostly
out of the United States' and to a lesser extent Britain's
interests. The efforts of any individuals to make an
international system were still fundamentally to build a world
order benefiting the dollar and U.S. interests, and these
efforts would fade as the Cold War wore on. The IMF, World
Bank, and the world's financial standards in general were
forged at the behest of the United STates.

The nations of the Third World did not have a voice represented
at the conference for the most part, and most still had not
obtained their independence. Even the term "Third World" would
not be coined by Alfred Sauvy until five years after the
financial order was developed. The accords that would structure
the next three decades were monumental, cementing a new
financial order, but that order was one born not of struggle
but of

## The end of the dollar standard

Conflict over the Bretton Woods system did not just occur
between the First and Second Worlds. As the first international
agreement for currency exchange rates, things were rocky, and
every country had something to say about the use of the
dollar-gold peg system. The Soviet Union, shown above, was
opposed to this system from nearly the start for the power it
gave to U.S. dollar-holding banks. Some European nations were
opposed to the dollar standard because their economies grew
past what the Bretton Woods system had assumed. West Germany's
economy had grown in large amounts since the end of World War
II, and its currency increased in value sharply until monetary
policy was not enough to keep it at its original rate to the
dollar. So West Germany decided to leave the system.

Other countries objected to the use of the dollar standard as
unfairly benefiting the United States, with the French Finance
Minister Valéry Giscard d’Estaing complaining of this as
America's "exorbitant privilege." The dollar standard helped
establish the U.S. dollar as the world's reserve currency, or a
single currency through which all international trade was made.
A common language for trade was the de facto standard for all
nations, as it would require much more work to produce and
manage separate exchange systems across every possible
combination of currencies. Under White's version of Bretton
Woods, the dollar became the peg that nations had to maintain,
and most nations also took the dollar as their reserve currency
partially because that they were already prepared to exchange
their currencies for it.^[Under Keynes' system, this would have
been the stateless "bank money" or _bancor_ as explained above.
Also, "partially" here is because while the dollar standard
helped cement the reserve currency practice, the elephant in
the room is the dominance of the U.S. economy itself that made
the dollar appear safer than other currency.] Politicians like
d'Estaing found this reserve currency status distateful,
because while France and other countries had to produce and
sell goods to the U.S. or another dollar-holding country to
obtain dollars, the U.S. began with a massive coffer of dollars
and had the sovereign power to print more dollars as
needed.^[On one hand, it's a little more complicated than that,
as the U.S. was obligated to maintain the dollar-gold ratio at
$35/ounce, and printing endless amounts of dollars would drive
that down. On the other hand, as explained in the following
paragraph, this essentially happened after the U.S. pumped so
many dollars into the world economy that the value of the
dollar went down.]

France was also worried by postwar developments and U.S.
spending after the war, which pumped so many dollars into the
world economy that it eventually overtook the dollar value of
U.S.-held gold. This meant that the dollar was worth less than
what the nominal $35/ounce rate might suggest, and this was
soon evidenced when the private gold market showed gold as
worth $40/ounce in 1960 (44, Gold the Dollar and wataergate).
The rate to buy gold from the U.S. state at $35/ounce was
therefore attractive, as it was less than what gold was
actually worth. Despite some policy attempts to reverse this
trend, eventually Switzerland and then France opted to convert
their dollars to gold. General Secretary of the Soviet Union
Leonid Brezhnev commented that this series of developments
reflected "the possibility of a profound crisis of the
capitalist system."

- vietnam war framing -- that the war was going so well that
  nixon's attention would now be on the economy

The Nixon adminstration saw these developments and realized
that the Bretton Woods dollar-gold standard was falling apart.
In August 1971, Nixon announced that he would end the
international convertibility of U.S. dollars to gold at the
fixed $35/ounce, in effect removing the U.S. from the gold
standard and letting it "float" instead -- having its value
fluctuate according to the market. The "Nixon shock," for it
was made unilaterally by the Nixon administration, echoed
throughout the world, as European nations moved to tie their
currencies together.

A side effect of the unpopularity of the dollar at the time was
the introduction of the Special Drawing Right (SDR) as the
official currency of the IMF in 1969. It seemed that both the
dollar and gold faced issues of scarcity that made them more
unstable than the IMF accounts should be, if they were a
diverse pool of resources from all over the world. The value of
the SDR would attempt to reflect that pool of resources, being
originally given value from the value of 16 currencies of the
world's largest economies.^[Today the formula for the value of
the SDR only includes five.] Although the SDR worked in giving
the IMF an alternative currency to use, it was limited in use
compared to an international currency. It could only be used
with the IMF and especially not with private parties, the
allocation of SDRs was always subject to IMF approval, and the
dollar still remained in most nations' coffers as the dominant
reserve currency of the world.

Thus, the IMF emerged mostly unscathed from the end of the
dollar-gold standard. Bretton Woods fell, but the IMF lived on.

## The emergence of conditionality

The other major development the IMF underwent during this era
was the solidification of its policy of conditionality.
Conditionality, or the set of conditions that a country must
agree to in order to receive a loan from the IMF, was not part
of the original IMF as established in the Bretton Woods
agreement. This was not to say that the original IMF functioned
solely as a fund that member nations could draw from freely, as
it was mandated to prevent nations from running large trade
deficits or surpluses in order to avoid economic crises. The
policy of conditionality established later differed in being
not a blanket set of regulations for all, but specifically
targeting countries that requested loans from the IMF.
Countries that requested loans from the IMF were now subject to
disciplinary rules and special standards.

This officially began in February 1952 during an Executive
Board meeting. The Managing Director would cautiously frame the
Fund's resolution by stating that

> [E]ven at the outset I think it must be clear that access to
> the Fund should not be denied because a member is in
> difficulty. On the contrary, the task of the Fund is to help
> members that need temporary help, and requests should be
> expected from members that are in trouble in greater or
> lesser degree.

[pg 2],

These were finally set into metaphorical stone in 1969, when
the IMF Articles of Agreement were amended for the first time.
The IMF was ready to say that as part of its core duties, it
would "adopt policies on the use of its resources that will
assist members to solve their balance of payments problems ...
and that will establish adequate safeguards for the temporary
use of its resources."

In other words, the Fund was meant to try its best to give
loans as it was intended to, and the regulations attached
should not specifically target those nations in need. In this
meeting other officials would similarly express caution over
these regulations, for example blocking the Fund from requiring
short-term repurchase agreements and even a requirement for
nations to provide a written statement agreeing with the
"principles" of a lending decision.^[A repurchase agreement
involves one party selling securities and purchasing them back
at another date. This could function as collateral in the case
of the IMF; a nation would give the IMF a security as
collateral for cash.] Besides these sentiments, the IMF did not
extensively restrict or specify the types of conditions that
could be attached, with the Managing Director stating that "it
would be too much to expect that we should be able to solve
with one stroke the entire problem of access to the Fund's
resources ... We shall have to feel our way."

Despite the cautious sentiments about the IMF's power, "feeling
its way" meant negotiating these policies with each country for
each crisis, and the IMF as a financially and politically
powerful institution often had the upper hand in these
negotiations. Countries in crisis, especially countries with
smaller economies and less external resources, needed loans
from the IMF more than the IMF "needed" any country. The IMF
did feel its way through the conditionality issue over decades
of practice, but it would eventually veer towards more
conditions, more stringent conditions, and conditions birthed
from the limited-government stnaces advocated for during the
1980s.

The prime example of these can be seen in the IMF's response to
the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s, the most severe
and widespread economic crisis in Latin American history and
the largest test of the IMF's aid programs. Before the crisis,
the IMF's policies of conditionality were undoubtedly known and
common. But after the crisis, when the IMF had to not only
negotiate between a country but conduct a set of negotiations
across an entire continent, these policies began to consolidate
into a canon. These policies had cohered into a set of
principles that John Williamson would famously call the
Washington Consensus in 1989. In other words, through practice,
a single set of principles would dominate over others.

The crisis began building from economic activity of the 1970s.
As Latin American countries underwent large development
campaigns, they took out large loans from American banks.
American banks saw these campaigns as relatively safe
investments and therefore lent them money. An element of
doing-as-others-did was at play here; as large banks gave loans
to Latin American countries, other banks felt it was safe to do
the same. Brazil, Chile, Argentina, Peru, and Mexico especially
began building large amounts of foreign debt. Debt to foreign
creditors began at $29 billion in 1970, but by 1982 Latin
American nations owed $327 billion dollars -- an increase of
over 1000% percent in ten years. Economist Jeffrey Sachs noted
at the time that for nine major U.S. banks, the total amount
loaned to Latin American countries totaled almost three times
their capital.

Around the same time, partially due to Nixon's move to end the
Bretton Woods system as described above, the world underwent a
period of "stagflation" that involved a continued increase in
currency value (inflation) but rising unemployment and stagnant
economic output. In 1980, U.S. Secretary of Treasury Paul
Volcker began a recovery campaign from this recession through
anti-inflation measures, which meant increased interest rates
on U.S. loans to other nations towards a general campaign to
push down the value of the U.S. dollar. The "Volcker shock"
resulted in a tamed inflation rate for the United States, but
also a global contraction of trade. Latin American countries
that depended heavily on trade were hit hard, as their exports
dropped dramatically in value.

The trend in accumulating debt for a decade suddenly became
unstable because of this. U.S. banks began ending the trend of
refinancing expiring loans, making countries scramble to pay
loans back. Even Latin American countries that did not
experience this issue had to continue depleting their reserves
to pay heightened interest payments, which reached over 18%
near their peak in 1981.^[pg 89 manuel pastor jr] And these
continued depletions could not be matched by exports to
adequately replenish a country's reserves, as these exports
fell in value due to the economic ripples of the Volcker shockn
value due to the economic ripples of the Volcker shock.

The unstated assumption in the literature here is that these
programs most often centered around industrialization programs
that Latin

Eventually, the mountain of debt began to fall. In August 12th,
1982, Mexican Finance Minister Jesús Silva Herzog announced
that Mexico could no longer pay its debt, beginning a 90-day
moratorium on loan payments and requesting a restructuring of
its loans so that they could be paid. Silva Herzog, U.S.
Secretary of Treasury Paul Volcker, and IMF Managing Director
Jacques de Larosière began immediately coordinating a financing
plan to prevent the crisis from escalating any further. Mexico
would implement the IMF's prescribed adjustment program, in
exchange for about $1.3 billion from the IMF, $925 million each
from the Bank of International Settlements and the U.S.
government, and about $5 billion from a staggering 526
commercial banks. In March 3rd, 1983, the agreement was signed,
and in March 15th, the last of 526 partnering banks finished
signing this agreement. Other countries followed suit over the
next three years, some because they were in the same position
as Mexico and others because panicking banks ended the trend of
refinancing and their had to immediately be paid. One by one,
the IMF began arranging deals with governments.

For Mexico, this meant increasing the price of gasoline,
eliminating the fixed "preferential" exchange rate that Mexico
used for essential goods to ensure that they could always be
bought, and a cut of the national fiscal deficit from 16.5
percent to 8.5 percent of the countries' GDP. For Brazil, this
meant similarly meant reducing the borrowing requirement from
14% of the GDP to 8% by 1983, preventing wage increases, and
steadily devaluing the _cruzeiro_. Other countries' experiences
took after Mexico, Brazil, and Argentina's (Latin America's
three largest economies at the time) experiences here, all of
these prescriptions oriented towards quickly increasing
governments' ability to pay off debt by cutting its expenses,
and in the process convincing foreign creditors that remaining
in these countries was safe.

These requirements are strict and resulted in many countries
slashing public funding that in fact made the crisis worse,
requiring a second set of bailouts in the second half of the
1980s. But these conditions were still relatively cautious,
because most discussion around conditionality at the time tried
to limit its role. In 1979, speakers at the IMF's Annual
Meeting argued that IMF loan packages be greatly increased in
size and be given with fewer conditions, which Managing
Director Jacques de Larosière encouraged his senior staff to
do. Ariel Buira, a Director at the IMF from Mexico, would in
1981 lambast arguments for conditionality cutting down on
debtor nations' government programs, saying that

> This [argument for conditionality] is a nice 19th century
> liberal conception in which the state has a purely regulatory
> role and no development responsibilities, but surely one on
> which the Fund's 140 odd member countries may have their own
> views. I know that my authorities do not expect Fund guidance
> on this matter.

For Buira, this view was simplistic and contradictory. How
could proponents of limited government argue that the IMF
should have expanded conditionality? Buira would go on in this
statement to suggest that the practice of conditionality be
placed under a formal review, given that the IMF's current
case-by-case basis put debtor countries' prescribed packages at
the whims of IMF staff.

But despite Buira and others' protests, the IMF would expand
conditionality to cover structural reforms over the next few
years. The initial set of credit lines with limited
conditionality in the early 1980s proved to be a failure, with
most countries still lacking funds by 1985 to pay back their
debts. IMF staffers and creditor nations began pushing for
stronger conditions in hopes that the money they had invested
could be recovered. The review that Buira had advocated for
supported structural reforms when it was published in 1986.
More broadly, U.S. President Reagan's popularity meant advocacy
of limited government became the norm rather than an exception.

In 1985, U.S. Secretary of Treasury James Baker would introduce
a new recovery package would be called the Baker Plan. This
strategy would shift from short-term to long-term loans, and as
opposed to simpler fiscal austerity requirements, would also
require countries to

In blunt terms, this plan also did not work. Latin American
countries continued to default on their loans. A different
strategy was needed, as it became increasingly clear that many
countries would not be able to pay back their loans no matter
how hard they were pushed. In 1989, seven years after the
crisis had formally begun, U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas
Brady would introduce the Brady Plan as a final attempt to stop
the crisis. The Brady Plan allowed creditor banks to switch
their loans to tradable and discounted bonds, essentially
letting banks with large investments in Latin American
countries offload a portion to other banks, and in doing so
become less cautious about investing again in Latin America.
With renewed foreign investors' confidence, the crisis was
finally over.

Buira describes conditionality at best as "paternalism, by
which a country is guided towards its own good, rather like a
parent or a teacher guides a child in its own best interests,"
and at worst "elements that are unnecessary to overcoming the
payments crisis." One may harken back to paternal
justifications for empire of the sovereign kind, for everything
from James Kipling's _The White Man's Burden_ to Churchill's
insistence on denying Indian citizens of their independence.
Implicit in the assumptions of both justifications lie that
those who enforce these conditions know best, but "know best"
always happens to benefit the enforcer much more than the
debtor country. These standards even overlap in scope, with
both "old" colonial empires and the new reign of the IMF
converting dependent nations into export-oriented economies.

But unlike the regimes of empires past, the logic of the IMF
operates singularly on an economic discourse without making
reference to race or to the character of the subjects in the
dependent nation. The IMF is also intent on promoting itself as
international, even limiting

This thesis is not an economic one, so the point of this
perspective on conditionality is not to prove or disprove the
effect of any particular condition on any particular economic
outcome. Rather, I hope it is plainly obvious how the IMF is
not a lending fund that countries may use during times of
crisis but an enforcer of those policies essential to the
contemporary capitalist world order, and further how older
structures of empire have been reworked for the modern day by
institutions like the IMF. The mechanisms of this continuance
is visible in a multitude of ways, for example in the kinds of
standards that are enforced in both types of regimes and who
they benefit, but this thesis' main focus lies in the
assumptions behind these standards and how the standards
ultimately force these assumptions to be fulfilled.

## The IMF, version 1.0

The IMF received much criticism for its handling of the Latin
American crisis. (summarize criticisms, both then and now)

But the IMF, if anything, was strengthened after the Latin
American debt crisis. IMF economists and IMF-organized
conferences produced volumes of writing justifying the
high-conditionality of the debt crisis, and the policies of
conditionality til today have not fundamentally changed even to
today. The enforcement of loans during this era set a precedent
for future intervention with a more cohesive set of policies,
constituting the "Washington Consensus" in the words of John
Williamson.

The emergence of this set of policies was the culmination of
the transformation set in motion in the 60s. The IMF originally
ensured that the fixed exchange rates of the Bretton Woods
system remained stable by providing liquidity to countries
before their currencies could fall precipitously. After the
Nixon shock of 1973, the IMF no longer served as the funding
complement to a system of monetary policies, and instead began
implementing economic policies itself, policies which were
defined through great detail in the Latin American debt crisis
of the 1980s.

- 16753/3469 from 75-79 but 13936/24295 in early 80s and
  6363/15271 in the late 80s (561)

This is not to leave the original IMF free of criticism. The
central goals of the IMF stayed the same. Explicitly, the IMF
was meant to preserve financial stability through regulating
all nations' monetary systems. Implicitly, the policies of the
IMF were still constructed by and benefited banks in creditor
nations, most consistently the United States.

- the IMF now was not a fund but an authority, with policies
  that were enforced not by sovereign power but by loans to
  save a debtor nation from ruin.

- add disclaimer in footnote: the washington consensus itself
  wasn't as bad as it could have been, williamson just wanted
  to discuss the lowest common denominator. There was
  considerable range in the policies that were actually applied

But by the end of the Latin American debt crisis, the IMF, as
an institutional force, had outlived the original Bretton Woods
agreement that led to its birth. The dollar-gold duo system
that had led to political debacle in the 1960s and 70s was
effectively nonexistent in the 1980s, but the IMF was more
present than ever.
