# Introduction

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is one of the most
powerful financial and political institutions in the world,
having amassed about \$1 trillion in spending capacity. These
funds are deployed as loans to rescue countries during times of
crisis, with the requirement that debtor countries adopt
"structural adjustment programs" to orient their economies to
the IMF's desire. These most often involve austerity measures,
but can also stretch towards pushing countries towards export
of basic goods, privatization of state-owned companies, and
lifting market caps for foreign investors. The combination of
crisis, loan, and policy leads to the dispossession of
millions.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
This thesis is a historical analysis of the IMF's intervention
in South Korea during the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis. The
Asian Financial Crisis was the worst economic crisis Indonesia,
Thailand, and South Korea experienced since being formally
liberated, overtaking even the 2008 global economic crisis for
these countries in severity and scope. The IMF intervention
into these countries only worsened and prolonged the crisis,
even launching Korea into a recession through harsh austerity
measures and mandated "labor market flexibility." Due to both
the economic crash and the IMF restrictions, countries that
were formerly cast as the "Asian Tigers" undergoing the "Asian
miracle" suddenly experienced the closure or takeover of many
of their largest corporations, millions of people experiencing
unemployment, and political upheavals. In Korea, the severe
austerity measures instantly led citizens to call the era the
"IMF crisis," and everything from household jewelry to massive
conglomerates seemed to disappear overnight.^[The crisis also
serves as a commonly used and salient backdrop in many pieces
of Korean media. A very, very popular one right now is 수물다섯
수물하나, or _Twenty-Five Twenty-One_, a coming-of-age drama
that takes place in 1998 and colored with the daily economic
hardship imposed during the IMF era. I recommend it!]
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Despite the significance of such a period, literature on the
crisis is incomplete. Disciplinary partitions exist between
scholars debating the economics of the crisis, those situating
the crisis in the history of Korea and Asia, and those
discussing the cultural significance of the crisis. As a
result, the topic of the racial logic of the Asian financial
crisis has not been addressed. Discussing the racial logic of
the crisis necessarily requires thinking across economics and
into ethnic studies and the humanities, to make meaning of
economic trends before the 1998 crisis came to fruition and to
deconstruct macroeconomic policy measures imposed on these
nations as wholly economic but nonetheless subjective. The
segmentation of the academy through area studies similarly
deters inquiry into the global logic of race, or how the IMF
intervention in Asia is a specific component of a larger scheme
deployed also in the Latin American debt crisis and elsewhere.
The connections between these interventions, understanding how
each serves both to differentiate parts of the globe but link
them into a global hierarchy, are left unquestioned. In the
words of my advisor Professor Lisa Lowe, "the modern division
of knowledge into academic disciplines, focused on discrete
areas and objects of interest to the modern national
university, has profoundly shaped the inquiry into these
connections. Even the questions we can ask about these
histories are influenced by the unevenly inhabited and
inconstently understood aftermath of these obscured
conditions."^[@loweIntimaciesFourContinents2015, page 1-2.
Also, a note on terms: I prefer the language of partitions or
segmentations of the academy over disciplinary gaps or "gaps in
the literature," for two reasons. Firstly, the problem in the
general sense is not just disciplinary structures resulting in
a lack of study of some topics, as "gaps" might imply, but also
an issue of the specific ways current study is done. In some
cases there are gaps, for example on the question of racial
logic of the IMF that has not been focused on, but just as
often the issue is not the simple absence a problem but the way
it is discussed. In other words, we don't always need to add
more to the literature, sometimes a more helpful but
impractical solution would be to unwrite or rewrite what has
already been written. And when more should be added, the number
of topics that could be written about are infinite and thus
gaps will always exist; the problem is often not the gaps
themselves but the lines and currents along which these gaps
are formed that require deeper questioning into the processes
of the academy than simply identifying a missing area and
jumping in. Secondly, "partitions" and "segmentations" hint at
an orchestrated process that can be pushed back on, rather than
any natural or inherent divide. There are not just gaps, parts,
or segments of the academy but areas that have been
partitioned, that have been segmented, and even forced apart.]

This segmentation in analyses of the crisis also limits
criticism. As an example, I struggled while writing this thesis
to reconcile the beliefs of several leaders against the
consequences of their actions during the crisis. Korean
Presidents Kim Young-Sam and Kim Dae-Jung, Korean Finance
Minister Kyung Ki-Hwan, and IMF Managing Directors Michel
Camdessus and Stanley Fischer, all seemed to be fairly
progressive in their fields and to have no choice but to
desperate woo international investors back to avoid outright
bankruptcy of the Korean government. Kim Dae-Jung in particular
had been a prominently recognized labor and human rights
activist in the three decades before he became President. Yet
through their actions, millions of people lost their jobs, and
after the IMF intervention Korea was further entrenched in
those forces that caused the crisis.

It is tempting to hopelessly accept the actions of Kim Dae-Jung
and other leaders and believe that difficult policy decisions
are unfortunate necessary. But the crisis was anything but
natural or inevitable. A trans-disciplinary perspective is
necessary to demonstrate this; to show the movement of
financial capital in the crisis did not arise from any strictly
objective economic flow but from the subjective view of Western
investors extending the racial logic of empires past, and to
understand how policy measures enacted during the crisis were
not just unjust but part of a global racial logic. Even more
generally, a wide scope of analysis is necessary to avoid
viewing capitalism as an inescapable economic or historical
process, as treading too steadily within a discpline's borders
might suggest, but as something that has been disguised as such
by a regime of economic reason that are far from reasonable.
Through comparison with the treatment of nations across the
globe, it quickly becomes clear IMF diagnoses stem from
presumption of difference.

So this thesis hopes to stretch past these boundaries. This
thesis is a history of the crisis, but my main contribution is
not an unveilment of a series of events. Instead, I attempt in
this thesis to look more broadly, at the discursive currents
from within which the crisis erupted, is understood, and
reinforced. I argue that the IMF's treatment of the crisis is
more than an economic intervention and instead pushes the world
into a recapitulated racial order. Through the delegation of
blame, through the policies prescribed, through diplomatic
relations with debtor countries, and through post-crisis
analyses in IMF-mediated conference sessions hosted by
IMF-employed economists, the IMF is able to elevate the world
of Western creditors while denigrating those who depend on
them. I focus on Korea, but its experience is one aspect of a
larger global hierarchy that the IMF creates by comparing Korea
and other Asian countries to the rest of the world. In doing
so, the IMF brings forth racial categories of empires past,
congratulating some countries as "models" for others, others as
"acceptable," and all debtors as having experienced crises
because they had not yet progressed to the level of the
successful countries that served as creditors.

More broadly, I hope through this thesis to discuss the shifted
nature of empire today. Calls for white nations to civilize the
lower races no longer take the center stage of the discourses
of empire. Instead, empire extends itself via systems and
discourses of evaluation that rank based on racial difference
while disguised as objective. The IMF and the Asian financial
crisis are one important component in this machine, but more
broadly we should be critical of all that purports to be
universal. As I show in this thesis, the rational, the
economic, the financial all serve to rank nations and races,
and are successful in doing so because they appear to apply a
single set of rules towards all, and thus any resulting
difference must be extrinsic rather than a fault of the ranking
logic itself. In fact, these systems are all but universal,
always being applied unevenly depending on presumed racial
differences, and in turn reifying those racial differences to
be further embedded in seemingly universal logic.

I begin this argument with a literature review of of the IMF
and the Asian financial crisis, especially focusing on how
current segmentations prevent the IMF's racial logic from being
understood or critiqued. To begin this critique, I discuss the
IMF's founding and its transformation from a relatively simple
lending body to a policy-prescribing institution. Within this
historical context, I also describe the world's shift away from
a single currency system regulated by states and the IMF, and
towards a floating, market-based series of measures in which
currencies could rise and fall rapidly. I then discuss how this
volatility laid the ground for the speculative investment that
grew into the Asian financial crisis, and finally discuss the
IMF's diagnosis and policy prescription that ignored this
speculation in favor of indicting "crony capitalism" in Korea.
I critique this position as as one that presumes racial
differences and masks them in the rhetoric of reason,
simultaneously ending and fulfilling the narrative of the
"Asian miracle" of economic success in the decades prior. With
the 1998 crisis, the Western world was able to cement Korea's
position as just outside of modernity, economically successful
but always subpar. In this discussion, I draw from scholars of
the Marxist tradition including Rosa Luxemburg, John Smith, and
David Harvey, and from scholars of racial capitalism including
Paula Chakravartty, Denise Ferreira da Silva, Jodi Byrd, Zenia
Kish, and Justin Leroy.
