# Literature review

## The IMF and the Asian financial crisis

The role of the IMF in the Asian financial crisis offers one
chance for this expanded theorization. Before the crisis, South
Korea was boasting record low unemployment rates, had worker's
rights and labor laws that were among the strongest of the OECD
group, all with a consistently low inflation rate and while
being known for its cautious stance on foreign
investment.^[@cliftIMFPoliticsAusterity2018;
@hwangLongTermImplicationsNeoliberal2015; @kim2001imf] But the
unemployment rate in South Korea quadrupled in less than a year
after the crisis began in October 1997, and the IMF quickly
transitioned from an obscure international economic agency into
a household name.^[@kim2002; @martin-jones2007; @park1999].

The former face of the new Korean generation and proclaimer of
equality, Kim Dae-Jung, turned an about-face on his belief in
protecting the Korean economy and quickly accepted the IMF's
recommendation to put Korea's central banks up for
sale.^[@chossudovsky2000] In other words, the glass image of
capitalist stability was cracked and laid bare, as the IMF
quickly opened the South Korean economy for outside financial
institutions to buy up and the labor rights fought for by
unions were reset after company acquisitions.

The responses in the literature for the IMF intervention here
is polarized, and for the purposes of my analysis fall into
three groups. The first are traditional economic analyses of
the IMF's programs, which generally support the IMF's goals
even if sometimes criticizing the current state of structural
adjustment programs (SAPs).^[@griesgraber, @bird2017,
@stone2004, @feldstein1998] The most regular players here come
from the IMF itself, as well as associated parties like the
World Trade Organization and the US Treasury. The consensus of
these parties, even after the Asian financial crisis,

The second group are critical of the IMF, and through both
quantitative and qualitative analyses try to identify the
detrimental nature of the IMF's programs to the economic growth
of a country.^[@vines2004; @meltzer2000; @clements2013;
@garuda2000; @barro2005; @stiglitz2003; @easterly2005] Of
particular note in this group are the International Financial
Institution Advisory Committee, organized in 1998 by the U.S.
Congress after the Asian Financial Crisis. This committee,
headed by Allan Meltzer of Carnegie Mellon University, produced
a report largely of the IMF's current policy of conditionality
and suggested replacing it with limited "pre-conditions" that
would guarantee a loan during crisis. The "Meltzer Report" was
met with large criticism from the first group mentioned above,
as a "radical" or unreasonable reform.^[See the U.S. Treasury
response at
<https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/meltzer.pdf>,
@zotero-398; @bird2000; and discussion of the debate at
@goldstein2002a] One commission member, Charles Calomiris,
complained in a Congressional hearing about these responses,
saying that "[B]ehind closed doors many critics are candid
about their primary reason for objecting to our proposals:
'Forget economics; it's the foreign policy,
stupid.'"^[@calomiris2000] In other words, the Meltzer Report
had attempted to give reforms that were reasonable
economically, but believed the report was rejected because of
conflicting goals for foreign policy. Also of note here is the
former chief economist and senior vice president of the World
Bank, Joseph Stiglitz, who was likely the most prominent critic
of the IMF's policies during this era.^[See @stiglitz2003 as
cited above, but also @stiglitz2000; @stiglitz2001a; and
@stiglitz2001b.] Stiglitz's criticisms were similarly met with
unpopularity among some.^[An interesting note is that Stiglitz
had serious competition at the time with then-U.S. Treasury
Secretary Lawrence Summers over this position, even contending
that Summers prevented him from being re-appointed to Stiglitz'
World Bank position in 1999. Lawrence Summers would of course
then go on to be President of Harvard University before being
kicked out for his conflict with the legendary Cornel West,
sexist rants on the underrepresentation of women in STEM, ties
to Jeffrey Epstein, and paying a professor's $28.5M lawsuit.]

Critics like Stiglitz of this second group often defend
globalization and the core goals of the IMF even while
critizing some of its enforcers, arguing that there simply must
be a return to the IMF's roots to make globalization work for
everyone. In contrast, the third group of writers on the IMF
take issue not only with the IMF's implementations of its
mandate but also the conceptual grounding on which these
programs are made.^[@cliftIMFPoliticsAusterity2018;
@leeThineOwnselfBe2003a;
@mccleeryWashingtonConsensusPostmortem2008; @jeon2014;
@muellerIMFNeoliberalismHegemony2011; @mueller2010;
@rileyPoliticsGlobalDebt2016;@sargentDebtEntanglementsWars2019;
@stuelke2021] These writers recognize that the IMF's economic
motivations are political ones, which often derive from
extended and recapitulated colonial relationships. Julie
Mueller of this group is most explicit in this approach,
advocating for a neo-Gramscian approach that analyzes both the
IMF's policies and the conditions leading to consent to these
policies in recipient countries. She contends that the success
of the IMF to convince the world its fundamental form of
intervention is necessary, along with the gigantic coffers to
support its policies, have constituted a new world hegemon.

I hope to join this third group of writers, and extend their
discussion with the discussion of raciality as co-constitutive
to the logic of financial capital. With solely an economic
focus on the IMF's policies, we are left with the fairly
obvious contention that the programs benefit some but leave
others behind. But this statement is not new, and even one that
the IMF would likely agree with. Given the organization openly
advocated for "labor market flexibility" in the Asian financial
crisis, the IMF seemed to have thought some would receive for
the worse end of its policies in exchange for the greater good
of economic progression. A historical, cultural, and conceptual
perspective of of the IMF must be undertaken to understand the
impact of this uneven development. This includes linking the
history of the IMF's responses and economic crises to the
history of empire, and analyzing the social categories that the
IMF uses and reinforces.

## Korean history

Both of these items can be seen through an incorporation of
Korea's historical trajectory and relationship with the United
States.

Historians of colonial Korea today include Theodore Jun Yoo,
Todd Henry, Gi-Wook Shin, David Fedman, and many others. Rather
than focusing on establishing a chronological history of Korea
under Japanese rule, these historians focus on specific
epistemelogical and social categories that are regulated by the
Japanese state and contested by native Koreans. On questions of
land, to cosmopolitan space, to gender and sexuality, the
Japanese government put forth formal and informal regulations,
and in response Koreans would rebel through moments like the
March First Movement, through guerilla fighting in the Korean
mountains, or by striking in Japanese-Korean
factories.^[@henry2020; @shin2014; @shin1999; @yoo2008;
@fedman2020; @henry2016].

After the ending of Japanese colonization, Korea was
unilaterally split in two by the United States. The divide was
infamously drawn by two army officials, who had little
knowledge of Korea besides a National Geographic map that they
used to draw the section of Korea they wanted to keep from the
Soviet Union. This began the period of violence that would
later develop into the Korean War, which would end with an
armistice signed between China, the United Nations as led by
the United States, and North Korea in 1953. Korea would see a
horrific scale of violence during this time, with more bombing
than in the entire Pacific Theater during World War II. This
along with the fact that the war had no clear beginning or
ending, that this war quickly became known in the U.S. as "the
forgotten war," and the fact that this served as the first
period of bloodshed for the U.S.' battle against communism,
have served as the motivation for many historians'
work.^[@fehrenbach2000; @fehrenbach2000; @stone2014,
@sandler2014] Critical histories of the Korean War begin with
Bruce Cumings' _Origins of the Korean War_, and today include
also Grace Cho's _The Haunting of the Korean Diaspora_, a
collection of works in _positions: east asia critique_ titled
_the unending korean war_ and led by Christine Hong, Monica
Kim's _The Interrogation Rooms of the Korean War_, and Daniel
Kim's _The Intimacies of Conflict_.^[@cho2008; @cumings1981;
@hong2015; @kim2020a; @kim2020] Cumings serves as a foundation
here, showing in his 1981 text _The Origins of the Korean War_
that the United States military effectively began the Korean
War with the arbitrary separation of the nation in 1945 and the
numerous massacres and concentration camps set up by the
US-backed Syngman Rhee regime in Korea between 1945 and 1950.
The more modern works continue this attempt to push back on the
U.S. periodization of the war as a conflict from 1950 to 1953,
describing how the violence extended before and much beyond
these years.

They also position the conflict and U.S. intervention as the
beginning of a turbulent era of U.S.-backed military
dictatorships, beginning with Syngman Rhee's appointment by the
U.S. army in 1945, lasting until the 1987 democratization of
Korea. Charles Kim, Seungsook Moon, Paul Chang, Namhee Lee, and
many others have written on South Korea during this period,
documenting the intellectual and cultural trends that fueled
resistance in these regimes.^[@chang2015; @kim2017; @lee2011;
@woo2019] Of particular note is the _minjung_ movement, or
perhaps "movement of the masses," a student and intellectual
movement seeking to reclaim Korean history as that of
victimhood to that of agency. Other writing on organizing in
Korea extends Namhee Lee's writing on this.^[@em2013;
@kang2010; @choiDiscourseDecolonizationPopular1997; @choo2016]

In summary, recent trends in histories of Korea have turned
away from uncovering an objective truth as a first generation
of U.S. scholars had, but towards more explicitly critiquing
and deconstructing social categories in Korea's history.^[This
is not at all to incriminate the first generation of scholars
as being unnuanced or incorrect; histories like Cumings' that
exposed what military aggression and popular narratives hid are
of course essential, and themselves unpacked ideology and
culture as well.] However, much of this perspective is lacking
for the economy of Korea in a global context, and the IMF
crisis in Korea. The majority of works in this field that
analyze Korea's place in the crisis are aligned with the
perspective of the IMF, indicting the "crony capitalism" of
Korean _chaebol_ groups without acknowledging any of the
financial conditions that led to the crisis, the intervention
that exacerbated it, or the logic that drove the intervention.
Some exceptions here are writing from Jesook Song on the
welfare state during the crisis, and several works from film
studies, from Joseph Jonghyun Jeon, Jinying Li, and David
Martin-Jones.^[@song2007; @jeon2014; @jeon2019; @li2009;
@martin-jones2007]
