# Theoretical background

## Racialized accumulation by dispossession

My thesis begins with Marx, and specifically his writing on
capitalist accumulation. For Marx, the distinction between
capitalism and feudalism or other modes of production lay in
employer's ability to systematically generate profit. By only
paying the amount that was required for capitalists to continue
consuming worker's labor power, or in other words low hourly
wages, even selling a product simply at its market-desired
value could generate returns for the owner of the machinery and
process that created the product (also known as the means of
production). The generated profit could be reinvested to
generate additional product, turning what could be simply
leftover profit into capital.

Capital accumulation inevitably leads to overaccumulation. At
some point the resources required to sustain this process reach
a limit -- perhaps there is not enough land to continue
expanding a farm or factory, or there is not enough demand to
consume the products generated by the reinvestment of capital.
In both the former case of a production-side problem or the
latter case of a consumption-side problem, overaccumulation
occurs because of continuous drive to produce without end. As
Marx says, “The ultimate reason for all real crises always
remains the poverty and restricted consumption of the masses as
opposed to the drive of capitalist production to develop the
productive forces as though only the absolute consuming power
of society constituted their limit.”^[@marx1992; cited in
@sewellWhatCausesCapitalist2012]

There are generally two strategies that can accomodate this
overaccumulation. On one hand, and as Marx described, the
products may undergo a massive devaluation. This constitutes
most of our modern economic crises, including the Asian
financial crisis as will be explained below. When products that
were in excess are devalued, they can again be bought and sold
as capital, and the march towards production can begin again.

Marxist philosopher-activist Rosa Luxemburg pointed out another
possibility in _The Accumulation of Capital_ (1913), arguing
that the underpayment of workers would require products under
capitalism to be underbought, and that capitalism's solution
for itself was expansion via war and conquest to find new
consumer bases where these surplus commodities could be
realized as profit. Around the same time period, Vladmir Lenin
published his iconic pamphlet _Imperialism: The Highest Stage
of Capitalism_ that detailed the converse of this process.
While Luxemburg saw expansion as capitalism's temporary "fix"
in providing new consumers, Lenin saw expansion as capitalism's
temporary "fix" in providing new resources and workers from
which a larger array of products could be generated. Both saw
the events of the time, like Japan's annexation of Korea and
intrusion into China, as driven by capitalist's ever-increasing
need for both labor and consumption.

Over a hundred years after Marx first wrote about
overaccumulation, David Harvey revisited these works and
synthesized them with Marx's writing on _primitive
accumulation_. Marx saw the economic process of accumulation as
having started with capital obtained by entirely noneconomic
and violent means. These included gold and silver taken from
the Americas, the enslavement and murder of Indigenous
populations there, the looting of South Asia by the British
East India Company, the Transatlantic slave trade and
enslavement of Africans in America, and the forceful
expropriation of land from the English peasantry. Harvey argued
in 2003 that these violent appropriations that Marx described
did not just contribute to accumulation during the prehistory
of capital, as Marx described, but was an essential aspect of
accumulation itself. Similarly, restructuring and expansion
described by Lenin, Luxemburg, and others that capitalism
required did not only take place not only in times of formal
economic crises but throughout all of capitalist history. Given
that these appropriations were not "primitive" as Marx called
them but were an integral part of accumulation, Harvey termed
these processes as _accumulation by dispossession_.

In addition to a temporal synthesis, Harvey's theory of
accumulation by dispossession also pushed theories of
capitalism towards viewing capitalism as a social and
dispossessive process rather than an economic one. Marx
originally described capital as both a social and economic
relation, and although no one has challenged or doubted this
characterization, traditional Marxist theory and contemporary
trends in cultural studies and the humanities have somewhat
suggested a widening rift in the social and economic aspects of
capitalism. The theory of accumulation by dispossession
provided a return to this original formulation, made even more
relevant by the obfuscated and constantly reorganizing
economies of the neoliberal age.

The phrase and theory of accumulation by dispossession has
struck a chord in the past twenty years, generating thousands
of texts that expand on Harvey's own writing and apply the
concept to many social contexts.^[@banerjee-guha2010;
@flint2018; @glassman2006; @hall2013; @krippner2011;
@thatcher2016; @webster2014] The theory has generated much
criticism as well, from both traditional Marxists and from
cultural theorists.^[@bin2018; @das2017] One important strand
of critique begins with Paula Chakravartty and Denise da
Silva's collection _Race, Empire, and the Crisis of the
Subprime_.[@chakravarttyAccumulationDispossessionDebt2012a;
followed by @byrd2018; @kish2015; @mccarthy2016; @tilley2018]
They note that while Harvey's theory of _accumulation by
dispossession_ emphasizes the social processes of dispossession
that are at capitalism's core, Harvey takes race for granted in
his writing because he notes simply the disproportionate burden
of these acts of dispossession on people of color. He stops
short of discussing the racial logic that would allow such a
burden to appear. Thus, even while criticizing the burden of
the economic impact on people of color, race and racism are
taken as "primitive" or preexisting concepts over which modern
capitalist forces take hold. Ferreira da Silva and Chakravartty
push back on this and argue that race continues to order
accumulation in and of itself, and specifically in the subprime
mortgage crisis that Black recipients of loans are
_continually_ configured to be outside of the relationship of
an economic transaction and the capacity to pay one side of the
trade.[See also @silvaGlobalIdeaRace for more from Ferreira da
Silva on this topic.]

Ferreira da Silva and Chakravartty frame their work as a study
of global racial capitalism and argue that "race in the
_naturalized_ ways U.S. Americans deploy the term cannot be the
privileged and sole critical
descriptor"^[@chakravarttyAccumulationDispossessionDebt2012a,
369] of the various manifestations of the logics of
dispossession on the "others of Europe." They emphasize that
the varied ways race is understood, deployed, and experienced
requires an expansive understanding of race that accounts for
its contradictions, in their study describing why Black and
Latino subjects are at once preconfigured as "aberrant economic
subjects in the very articulation of postracial claims of
achieved equality." Their collection goes on to describe the
ontology of this dynamic in the 2008 subprime mortgage crisis,
but stops there. Other relationships, other parts of the globe,
other crises are left unaddressed, and their gesture towards a
global logic of race describes only one of its manifestations.
My project will attempt to complement to their discussion by
discussing debt and raciality as global concepts, similarly
illustrating how race serves to reconcile the simultaneous
universality of capitalism in a single logic with its capacity
to rank or differentiate. While Chakravartty and Ferreira da
Silva focus on U.S. banking institutions and the subprime
mortgage loan, I will focus on the IMF's crisis loans; while
they critique the dispossession of the "others of Europe" by
focusing on Black and Latino/a homeowners, I will focus on the
(mis)handling of the 1997 Asian financial crisis, and as a case
study focus on the crisis' escalation to catastrophe in South
Korea.

More than just being a difference in topic or scope, I hope
that this positioning will enable my project to connect
Chakravartty and Ferreira da Silva's analysis of the racial
logic of debt with postcolonial theory and theories of
globalization. These are undoubtedly concepts that Ferreira da
Silva and Chakravartty stretch towards in their collection, and
other authors have similarly tried to bridge the gap between
contemporary theories of race and theories of
globalization.^[Relevant here are @amin2014;
@featherstoneGlobalCultureNationalism1990; @sassen1998; and
@jenkinsBondsInequalityDebt2021, but there is so much insight
and work in this field that cannot fit into a single footnote.]
But in my view, very little literature has questioned the
racial categories that give rise to the "globalized" world of
today. Discussion on globalization, expanded on below, often
criticizes the unequal economic nature and sometimes (like
Harvey) notes the disproportionate impact of this economic
burden on people of color, but no theoretical or empirical
discussion has discussed how the racial and economic imbalances
are not coincidental but part of the same fundamental process
of capitalist dispossession. I hope that my thesis can fill
this gap.

## Dependency and world-systems theory

The complement to the lneage of racialized accumulation by
dispossession, predating Harvey's paper by some forty years,
comes dependency and world-systems theorists. In contrast to
theorists of accumulation that focus on the engines of
capitalism, dependency and world-systems theorists focused on
questions of development and the current segmentation of the
world into parts of a whole. Their work offers a challenging
alternative to traditional theories of development, contending
that underdevelopment today occurs not from any innate or
learned deficiencies but from targeted processes of capitalist
exploitation.

Though dependency theory draws from Marxists theorists of
imperialism like Lenin and Luxemburg, it began in a more
official sense a few years after the end of World War II. As
scores of nations around the world declared and fought for
their independence, trade relations were increasingly not
enforced by one nation having sovereign power over another, but
by the laws of the "free" market and trade agreements between
two distinct nations. But the reigns of former colonial powers
were of course not relinquished with formal independence. A key
example of this lies in the trends of prices in "primary
products" like food and water against trends of prices in
manufactured goods like machinery. Primary products, as
necessities, often could not raise prices in response to demand
as manufactured goods do. As a result, economies based on
exports of raw goods like primary products have less and less
purchasing power over time compared to manufactured goods from
larger nations. Formerly colonized countries that have had
their economies forcibly oriented towards the production and
export of raw materials are thus placed at a ever-worsening
disadvantage once they enter the "free" market.

Hans Singer and Raul Prebisch wrote on this dynamic separately
in 1949, comprising what would become known as the
Prebisch-Singer hypothesis of inequality between
countries.^[@prebisch1962; @singer1949] This also laid the
foundation for dependency theory, or a social-economic analysis
of the inequality between former colonial powers and the
peoples they once colonized. Other scholars quickly followed
Prebisch and Singer, expanding on dependency theory to account
for many other factors besides the trade relationship described
in the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis. Walter Rodney, in his famous
book _How Europe Underdeveloped Africa_, wrote on Europe's
colonial relationship with Africa as the chief cause of
underdeveloped economies in Africa. Far from simply progressing
unevenly, Rodney contends that Europe was only able to
"progress" to its current stage of capitalist success because
it deprived that from African nations through slavery and
structuring economies towards exports of raw materials and
exports of everything else from colonial metropoles. The common
point in all of these theories lies in recognizing
interdependent but uneven pattern of development between "core"
countries with financial power and "periphery" countries that
do not. For countries at the core to enjoy everything from
automobiles to electricity, both tangible material resources
and financial capital in the abstract had to be moved from
countries at the periphery to countries at the core of the
world.

Perhaps the most recognizable extension of dependency theory
comes in the form of world-systems analysis, which emerged
during the 1970s most famously with Immanuel Wallerstein's
writing. Like dependency theory, world-systems analysis saw
development not as a country's internal process but as
inseparable from its place in the world at large. Unlike
dependency theory, which focused on units of relationships
between former colonial powers and their respective former
colonies, Wallerstein attempted to take a more expansive
perspective in also considering intra-regional and
within-nation relationships. Given that capitalist exploitation
occurred in much the same way within a nation itself as it did
across nations, and that many different international economic
relationships existed besides metropoles of empires exploiting
their colonies (or former colonies), a theorization of the
world at large had to stretch quite a bit beyond the focus of
dependency theory.

In other words, for Wallerstein the subject of analysis was not
a single country's dependency on another, but how the world at
large functioned independent of any qualifying condition.^[For
example, independent of a former colonizer-colony relationship,
or a recognizable exploiter-exploited relationship, or even
from nation to nation.] He began by describing mini-systems,
world empires, and world-economies as the three types of social
systems that could exist, and argued in Volume 1 of _The Modern
World-System_ that the current system was the capitalist
world-economy, and this encapsulated the entire world. Within
the capitalist world-economy were institutions, or structures
that enabled its functions; Wallerstein divded these into the
market, states, households, (economic) classes, and
"status-groups" or identities that individuals belonged to.
These institutions lent their own interrelated notions of
structure and hierarchy to the world, often in seemingly
contradictory ways. For example, institutions like the market
move us to prescribe to the universalist notion of meritocracy,
where all individuals are held to a single standard of judgment
by capacity. On the other hand, institutions of status-groups
are built through the anti-universalist norms like racism and
sexism, where individuals are held to multiple standards based
on their race and gender.

World-systems analysis has faced a number of critiques over the
years for its supposedly all-encompassing narrative described
above. Like criticisms of traditional Marxist works in general,
the most popular and continual of these content that
Wallerstein neglects culture for economic flows and
functions.^[@lee2007, @aronowitz1981, @robertson1985,
@mueller2020, @sanderson2005, @benton1996] Though Wallerstein
acknowledges and describes culture as a part of the
world-system, critics argue that his conception of culture does
not acknowledge its complexity, in treating identity as
discrete status-groups wrthout deconstructing their origin or
reproduction.^[@mueller2020 interestingly notes Wallertsein's
response that "I feel I've studied culture all my life," from
an interview in @kumar2001.] They also contend that Wallerstein
and many orthodox Marxist worldviews see historical progression
are driven chiefly by economic developments, and thus
inaccurately portray culture as secondary to an economic base
or root.

More broadly, world-systems analysis and dependency theory's
focus on material and financial capital prevents these schools
of thought from deconstructing the epistemological categories
that let material goods and financial capital move, or that may
appear even when the movement of physical resources does not.
Political ideology, race and gender, space, among others remain
mostly unquestioned in discussions of dependency or
world-systems. Theorists ike Wallerstein and Rodney, who do
theorize on how capital accumulation functions across race as a
category, neglect to deconstruct race or ask how the category
itself was formed.

One example of this economic focus and its incompleteness can
be seen in Korea's relationship with the United States. Both
dependency theory and world-systems theory focus on material
goods and their transport, and in a secondary sense focus on
finance capital and its transport across the globe. This does
not apply well to countries like Korea; the U.S. did not begin
occupying Korea in 1945 for economic or material gain, but to
support the logic of liberal capitalism that was threatened by
the Soviet Union, North Korea, and China. Nonetheless, Korea
never stopped depending on the U.S. and paid in large amounts
for this. For example, South Korea fulfilled the U.S. request
to send 750,000 troops as support during the Vietnam War in
exchange for technological and financial repayment that Korea
received for decades from the U.S. Korea's economy for many
years was based on exports to its former colonizer of Japan and
to the United States.^[@hart-landsberg1984a, @han1974]. In
other words, the relationship between Korea and the United
States does not fit the typical cases described by dependency
and world-systems theorists, but the relationship has still
been one of a former colony in the periphery being dependent on
a "core" imperial power, to the effect of upholding the pulse
of capitalism.

Wallerstein offered a useful comment on world-systems analyses'
limitations in 1998, when he argued that world-systems analysis
was not a theory in its own right but only an analysis of the
world.^[@wallerstein1998, pp. 109.] World-systems analysis was
first presented as an argument against modernization theory,
pointing out how many of modernization theory's notions of
progress contradicted the material conditions of the world at
the time, and especially its unequal patterns of development.
World-systems analysis was begun to push back on this, and thus
its main focus in Wallerstein's words was not to provide a true
theory of the world but to "clear the underbrush" for future
conceptions of the world and its development. While disagreeing
with the Wallerstein's use of "theory" semantically,^[Ruth
Wilson Gilmore describes theorizing as a ubiquitous task we
undertake whether we would like to or not. Everything from
planning our day to reflecting on our own lives to producing an
academic paper describing a train of thought is theorizing. I
prefer this perspective.] I agree with the general sentiment
that the worldview presented by world-systems analysis does not
have to be relied on, or even battled over in a fight for some
single theory of the world.

To conclude, dependency theory and world-systems analysis are
incredibly valuable, but have always been incomplete, and as
Wallerstein suggests the need to steer clear from dogmatic
tendencies and towards new theory is always beneficial. More
concretely, while Chakravartty, Ferreira da Silva, Micahel
McCarthy, and others as cited above fall short of describing
the global, dependency and world-systems analysts fall short of
describing the social and racial. The next section illustrates
how these theoretical limitations are matched by disciplinary
segmentations in the literature of the Asian financial crisis.
