---
title: The IMF and Global Dispossession
subtitle: A literature review
author: Nathan Kim
date: Advised by Professor Lisa Lowe
nocite: '@*'
indent: true
# uncomment the below for double spacing
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{setspace}
  - \doublespacing
---

## Introduction

Since its founding in 1944, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has amassed a
total of 705 billion Special Drawing Rights in spending capacity, or about \$1
trillion. This spending capacity is deployed as loans during times of crisis,
compared to the World Bank's extensive general lending system. Through these
loans, relatively small Washington-based organization (of only \~2,300 staff
members) with no subsidiary organizations is able to move the global economy,
millions of people at a time. Its focus on low-to-middle-income countries during
crises means that the most vulnerable of the global population are affected by
its work.

The IMF's loans are not without caveats. Under the stated purpose of ensuring
loan repayment and financial stability, or "conditionality," the IMF requires
that loan-receiving countries also implement a set of macroeconomic policy
reforms known as Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs). These include "purely"
economic measures like currency devaluation, austerity measures, and
restructuring or refinancing foreign debts, but also include liberalization of
markets broadly, privatization of state-owned companies in particular, opening
the country to foreign investment, and a stipulation for the country to move
towards resource extraction and export. Although the majority of IMF loans do
come with market-rate interest rates and often require collateral, both of which
can be a significant burden for countries requesting aid, SAPs are far more
powerful in terms of creating long-term subjugating economic relations. SAPs
push countries in the Global South to cheaply produce and export goods to the
Global North, where only then they are realized as profit.[This is the main
subject of @smithImperialismTwentyFirstCentury2016] SAPs push countries to
denationalize basic necessities and turn them over to multinational corporations
in order to qualify for loans.[See @ciafoneEndowingNeoliberalUniversity2005 for
a detailed history on Yale's relationship with privatizing Indonesian power.] In
more direct terms, SAPs push countries into a recapitulated racial hierarchy, a
new imperialism, an imperialism for the twenty-first
century.[@harveyNewImperialism2003; @smithImperialismTwentyFirstCentury2016]

This literature review summarizes prior research and the theoretical background
for this argument. I begin with a description of capital accumulation and
accumulation by dispossession as described by Marx, Rosa Luxemburg, and David
Harvey. I then contrast more recent theories on this topic from Denise Ferreira
da Silva, Paula Chakravartty, and several others that attempt to further
theorize the social and racial and its role in capitalism. I provide a
complement to this perspective from the other strands of dependency theory and
world-systems analysis, and describe how my thesis attempts to bring these
theories together. To explain the context these theories will be applied in, I
will then describe existing work on the IMF and associated global financial
bodies like the World Bank. Finally, I will briefly summarize work in Korean
history and note how historical perspectives are useful to understanding the
IMF's role in Korea.

## Theoretical background

### Racialized accumulation by dispossession

My thesis begins with Marx, and specifically his writing on capitalist
accumulation. For Marx, the distinction between capitalism and feudalism or
other modes of production lay in employer's ability to systematically generate
profit. By only paying the amount that was required for capitalists to continue
consuming worker's labor power, or in other words low hourly wages, even selling
a product simply at its market-desired value could generate returns for the
owner of the machinery and process that created the product (also known as the
means of production). The generated profit could be reinvested to generate
additional product, turning what could be simply leftover profit into capital.

Capital accumulation inevitably leads to overaccumulation. At some point the
resources required to sustain this process reach a limit -- perhaps there is not
enough land to continue expanding a farm or factory, or there is not enough
demand to consume the products generated by the reinvestment of capital. In both
the former case of a production-side problem or the latter case of a
consumption-side problem, overaccumulation occurs because of continuous drive to
produce without end. As Marx says, “The ultimate reason for all real crises
always remains the poverty and restricted consumption of the masses as opposed
to the drive of capitalist production to develop the productive forces as though
only the absolute consuming power of society constituted their
limit.”^[@marx1992; cited in @sewell].

There are generally two strategies that can accomodate this overaccumulation. On
one hand, and as Marx described, the products may undergo a massive devaluation.
This constitutes most of our modern economic crises, including the Asian
financial crisis as will be explained below. When products that were in excess
are devalued, they can again be bought and sold as capital, and the march
towards production can begin again.

Marxist philosopher-activist Rosa Luxemburg pointed out another possibility in
_The Accumulation of Capital_ (1913), arguing that the underpayment of workers
would require products under capitalism to be underbought, and that capitalism's
solution for itself was expansion via war and conquest to find new consumer
bases where these surplus commodities could be realized as profit. Around the
same time period, Vladmir Lenin published his iconic pamphlet _Imperialism: The
Highest Stage of Capitalism_ that detailed the converse of this process. While
Luxemburg saw expansion as capitalism's temporary "fix" in providing new
consumers, Lenin saw expansion as capitalism's temporary "fix" in providing new
resources and workers from which a larger array of products could be generated.
Both saw the events of the time, like Japan's annexation of Korea and intrusion
into China,

Over a hundred years after Marx first wrote about overaccumulation, David Harvey
revisited these works and synthesized them with Marx's writing on _primitive
accumulation_. Marx saw the economic process of accumulation as having started
with capital obtained by entirely noneconomic and violent means. These included
gold and silver taken from the Americas, the enslavement and murder of
Indigenous populations there, the looting of South Asia by the British East
India Company, the Transatlantic slave trade and enslavement of Africans in
America, and the forceful expropriation of land from the English peasantry.
Harvey argued in 2003 that these violent appropriations that Marx described did
not just contribute to accumulation during the prehistory of capital, as Marx
described, but was an essential aspect of accumulation itself. Similarly,
restructuring and expansion described by Lenin, Luxemburg, and others that
capitalism required did not only take place not only in times of formal economic
crises but throughout all of capitalist history. Given that these appropriations
were not "primitive" as Marx called them but were an integral part of
accumulation, Harvey termed these processes as _accumulation by dispossession_.

In addition to a temporal synthesis, Harvey's theory of accumulation by
dispossession also pushed theories of capitalism towards viewing capitalism as a
social and dispossessive process rather than an economic one. Marx originally
described capital as both a social and economic relation, and although no one
has challenged or doubted this characterization, traditional Marxist theory and
contemporary trends in cultural studies and the humanities have somewhat
suggested a widening rift in the social and economic aspects of capitalism. The
theory of accumulation by dispossession provided a return to this original
formulation, made even more relevant by the obfuscated and constantly
reorganizing economies of the neoliberal age.

The phrase and theory of accumulation by dispossession has struck a chord in the
past twenty years, generating thousands of texts that expand on Harvey's own
writing and apply the concept to many social contexts.^[@banerjee-guha2010;
@flint2018; @glassman2006; @hall2013; @krippner2011; @thatcher2016;
@webster2014] The theory has generated much criticism as well, from both
traditional Marxists and from cultural theorists.^[@bin2018; @das2017] One
important strand of critique begins with Paula Chakravartty and Denise da
Silva's collection _Race, Empire, and the Crisis of the
Subprime_.[@chakravarttyAccumulationDispossessionDebt2012a; followed by
@byrd2018; @kish2015; @mccarthy2016; @tilley2018] They note that while Harvey's
theory of _accumulation by dispossession_ emphasizes the social processes of
dispossession that are at capitalism's core, Harvey takes race for granted in
his writing because he notes simply the disproportionate burden of these acts of
dispossession on people of color. He stops short of discussing the racial logic
that would allow such a burden to appear. Thus, even while criticizing the
burden of the economic impact on people of color, race and racism are taken as
"primitive" or preexisting concepts over which modern capitalist forces take
hold. Ferreira da Silva and Chakravartty push back on this and argue that race
continues to order accumulation in and of itself, and specifically in the
subprime mortgage crisis that Black recipients of loans are _continually_
configured to be outside of the relationship of an economic transaction and the
capacity to pay one side of the trade.[See also @silvaGlobalIdeaRace for more
from Ferreira da Silva on this topic.]

But their discussion, while framed as a study of global capitalism and arguing
that "race as the _naturalized_ ways U.S. Americans deploy the term cannot be
the privileged and sole critical descriptor" of the various manifestations of
the logics of dispossession on the "others of Europe," still stops short of
studying dispossession across the globe. Their collection does not touch on
relationships between or across nations, institutions that drive these processes
forth, or how the crises they discuss manifest elsewhere.

My project will attempt to complement to their discussion by discussing debt and
raciality as global concepts. While Chakravartty and Ferreira da Silva focus on
U.S. banking institutions and the subprime mortgage loan, I will focus on the
IMF's crisis loans; while they critique the dispossession of the "others of
Europe" by focusing on Black and Latino/a homeowners, I will focus on the
(mis)handling of the 1997 Asian financial crisis, and as a case study focus on
the crisis' escalation to catastrophe in South Korea.

More than just being a difference in topic or scope, I hope that this
positioning will enable my project to connect Chakravartty and Ferreira da
Silva's analysis of the racial logic of debt with postcolonial theory and
theories of globalization. These are undoubtedly concepts that Ferreira da Silva
and Chakravartty stretch towards in their collection, and other authors have
similarly tried to bridge the gap between contemporary theories of race and
theories of globalization.^[Relevant here are @amin2014;
@featherstoneGlobalCultureNationalism1990; @sassen1998; and
@jenkinsBondsInequalityDebt2021, but there is so much insight and work in this
field that cannot fit into a single footnote.] But in my view, very little
literature has questioned the racial categories that give rise to the
"globalized" world of today. Discussion on globalization, expanded on below,
often criticizes the unequal economic nature and sometimes (like Harvey) notes
the disproportionate impact of this economic burden on people of color, but no
theoretical or empirical discussion has discussed how the racial and economic
imbalances are not coincidental but part of the same fundamental process of
capitalist dispossession. I hope that my thesis can fill this gap.

### Dependency and world-systems theory

The second major line of Marxist theorists I will draw from are scholars
exploring dependency and world-systems theory.

Though dependency theory draws from Marxists theorists of imperialism like Lenin
and Luxemburg, it began in a more official sense a few years after the end of
World War II. As scores of nations around the world declared and fought for
their independence, trade relations were increasingly not enforced by one nation
having sovereign power over another, but by the laws of the "free" market and
trade agreements between two distinct nations. But the reigns of former colonial
powers were of course not relinquished with formal independence. A key example
of this lies in the trends of prices in "primary products" like food and water
against trends of prices in manufactured goods like machinery. Primary products,
as necessities, often could not raise prices in response to demand as
manufactured goods do. As a result, economies based on exports of raw goods like
primary products have less and less purchasing power over time compared to
manufactured goods from larger nations. Formerly colonized countries that have
had their economies forcibly oriented towards the production and export of raw
materials are thus placed at a ever-worsening disadvantage once they enter the
"free" market.

Hans Singer and Raul Prebisch wrote on this dynamic separately in 1949,
comprising what would become known as the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis of
inequality between countries.^[@prebisch1962; @singer1949] This also laid the
foundation for dependency theory, or a social-economic analysis of the
inequality between former colonial powers and the peoples they once colonized.
Other scholars quickly followed Prebisch and Singer, expanding on dependency
theory to account for many other factors besides the trade relationship
described in the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis. Walter Rodney, in his famous book
_How Europe Underdeveloped Africa_, wrote on Europe's colonial relationship with
Africa as the chief cause of underdeveloped economies in Africa. Far from simply
progressing unevenly, Rodney contends that Europe was only able to "progress" to
its current stage of capitalist success because it deprived that from African
nations through slavery and structuring economies towards exports of raw
materials and exports of everything else from colonial metropoles.

The common point in all of these theories is recognizing interdependent but
uneven pattern of development between "core" countries with financial power and
"periphery" countries that do not. For countries at the core to enjoy everything
from automobiles to electricity, both tangible material resources and financial
capital in the abstract had to be moved from countries at the periphery to
countries at the core of the world.

Perhaps the most recognizable extension of dependency theory comes in the form
of world-systems analysis, which emerged during the 1970s most famously with
Immanuel Wallerstein's writing. Like dependency theory, world-systems analysis
saw development not as a country's internal process but as inseparable from its
place in the world at large. Unlike dependency theory, which focused on units of
relationships between former colonial powers and their respective former
colonies, Wallerstein attempted to take a more expansive perspective in also
considering intra-regional and within-nation relationships. Given that
capitalist exploitation occurred in much the same way within a nation itself as
it did across nations, and that many different international economic
relationships existed besides metropoles of empires exploiting their colonies
(or former colonies), a theorization of the world at large had to stretch quite
a bit beyond the focus of dependency theory.

In other words, for Wallerstein the subject of analysis was not a single
country's dependency on another, but how the world at large functioned
independent of any qualifying condition.^[For example, independent of a former
colonizer-colony relationship, or a recognizable exploiter-exploited
relationship, or even from nation to nation.] He began by describing
mini-systems, world empires, and world-economies as the three types of social
systems that could exist, and argued in Volume 1 of _The Modern World-System_
that the current system was the capitalist world-economy, and this encapsulated
the entire world. Within the capitalist world-economy were institutions, or
structures that enabled its functions; Wallerstein divded these into the market,
states, households, (economic) classes, and "status-groups" or identities that
individuals belonged to. These institutions lent their own interrelated notions
of structure and hierarchy to the world, often in seemingly contradictory ways.
For example, institutions like the market move us to prescribe to the
universalist notion of meritocracy, where all individuals are held to a single
standard of judgment by capacity. On the other hand, institutions of
status-groups are built through the anti-universalist norms like racism and
sexism, where individuals are held to multiple standards based on their race and
gender.

World-systems analysis has faced a number of critiques over the years for its
supposedly all-encompassing narrative described above. The most popular and
continual of these content that Wallerstein neglects culture.^[@lee2007,
@aronowitz1981, @robertson1985, @mueller2020, @sanderson2005, @benton1996]
Though Wallerstein acknowledges and describes culture as a part of the
world-system,^[@mueller2020 interestingly notes Wallertsein's response that "I
feel I've studied culture all my life," from an interview in @kumar2001] critics
argue that his conception of culture does not acknowledge its complexity, in
treating identity as discrete status-groups without deconstructing their origin
or reproduction. They also contend that Wallerstein and many orthodox Marxist
worldviews see historical progression are driven chiefly by economic
developments, and thus inaccurately portray culture as secondary to an economic
base or root.

More broadly, world-systems analysis and dependency theory's focus on material
and financial capital prevents these schools of thought from deconstructing the
epistemological categories that let material goods and financial capital move,
or that may appear even when the movement of physical resources does not.
Political ideology, race and gender, space, among others remain mostly
unquestioned in discussions of dependency or world-systems. Theorists ike
Wallerstein and Rodney, who do theorize on how capital accumulation functions
across race as a category, neglect to deconstruct race or ask how the category
itself was formed.

One example of this economic focus and its incompleteness can be seen in Korea's
relationship with the United States. Both dependency theory and world-systems
theory focus on material goods and their transport, and in a secondary sense
focus on finance capital and its transport across the globe. This does not apply
well to countries like Korea; the U.S. did not begin occupying Korea in 1945 for
economic or material gain, but to support the logic of liberal capitalism that
was threatened by the Soviet Union, North Korea, and China. Nonetheless, Korea
never stopped depending on the U.S. and paid in large amounts for this. For
example, South Korea fulfilled the U.S. request to send 750,000 troops as
support during the Vietnam War in exchange for technological and financial
repayment that Korea received for decades from the U.S. Korea's economy for many
years was based on exports to its former colonizer of Japan and to the United
States.^[@hart-landsberg1984a, @han1974]. In other words, the relationship
between Korea and the United States does not fit the typical cases described by
dependency and world-systems theorists, but the relationship has still been one
of a former colony in the periphery being dependent on a "core" imperial power,
to the effect of upholding the pulse of capitalism.

Wallerstein offered a useful comment on world-systems analyses' limitations in
1998, when he argued that world-systems analysis was not a theory in its own
right but only an analysis of the world.^[@wallerstein1998, pp. 109.]
World-systems analysis was first presented as an argument against modernization
theory, pointing out how many of modernization theory's notions of progress
contradicted the material conditions of the world at the time, and especially
its unequal patterns of development. World-systems analysis was begun to push
back on this, and thus its main focus in Wallerstein's words was not to provide
a true theory of the world but to "clear the underbrush" for future conceptions
of the world and its development. While disagreeing with the Wallerstein's use
of "theory" semantically,^[Ruth Wilson Gilmore describes theorizing as a
ubiquitous task we undertake whether we would like to or not. Everything from
planning our day to reflecting on our own lives to producing an academic paper
describing a train of thought is theorizing. I prefer this perspective.] I agree
with the general sentiment that the worldview presented by world-systems
analysis does not have to be relied on, or even battled over in a fight for some
single theory of the world.

To conclude, dependency theory and world-systems analysis are incredibly
valuable, but have always been incomplete. While Chakravartty, Ferreira da
Silva, Micahel McCarthy, and others as cited above fall short of describing the
global, dependency and world-systems analysts fall short of describing the
social and racial. It seems that these perspectives have much to offer, but much
like Wallerstein suggests it seems that the best path would be to take some of
their themes and then attempt to theorize once more.

## Existing work on the IMF and Korea

### The IMF and the Asian financial crisis

The role of the IMF in the Asian financial crisis offers one chance for this
expanded theorization. Before the crisis, South Korea was boasting record low
unemployment rates, had worker's rights and labor laws that were among the
strongest of the OECD group, all with a consistently low inflation rate and
while being known for its cautious stance on foreign
investment.^[@cliftIMFPoliticsAusterity2018;
@hwangLongTermImplicationsNeoliberal2015; @kim2001imf] But the unemployment rate
in South Korea quadrupled in less than a year after the crisis began in October
1997, and the IMF quickly transitioned from an obscure international economic
agency into a household name.^[@kim2002; @martin-jones2007; @park1999].

The former face of the new Korean generation and proclaimer of equality, Kim
Dae-Jung, turned an about-face on his belief in protecting the Korean economy
and quickly accepted the IMF's recommendation to put Korea's central banks up
for sale.^[@chossudovsky2000] In other words, the glass image of capitalist
stability was cracked and laid bare, as the IMF quickly opened the South Korean
economy for outside financial institutions to buy up and the labor rights fought
for by unions were reset after company acquisitions.

The responses in the literature for the IMF intervention here is polarized, and
for the purposes of my analysis fall into three groups. The first are
traditional economic analyses of the IMF's programs, which generally support the
IMF's goals even if sometimes criticizing the current state of structural
adjustment programs (SAPs).^[@griesgraber, @bird2017, @stone2004,
@feldstein1998] The most regular players here come from the IMF itself, as well
as associated parties like the World Trade Organization and the US Treasury. The
consensus of these parties, even after the Asian financial crisis,

The second group are critical of the IMF, and through both quantitative and
qualitative analyses try to identify the detrimental nature of the IMF's
programs to the economic growth of a country.^[@vines2004; @meltzer2000;
@clements2013; @garuda2000; @barro2005; @stiglitz2003; @easterly2005] Of
particular note in this group are the International Financial Institution
Advisory Committee, organized in 1998 by the U.S. Congress after the Asian
Financial Crisis. This committee, headed by Allan Meltzer of Carnegie Mellon
University, produced a report largely of the IMF's current policy of
conditionality and suggested replacing it with limited "pre-conditions" that
would guarantee a loan during crisis. The "Meltzer Report" was met with large
criticism from the first group mentioned above, as a "radical" or unreasonable
reform.^[See the U.S. Treasury response at
<https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/meltzer.pdf>,
@zotero-398; @bird2000; and discussion of the debate at @goldstein2002a] One
commission member, Charles Calomiris, complained in a Congressional hearing
about these responses, saying that "[B]ehind closed doors many critics are
candid about their primary reason for objecting to our proposals: 'Forget
economics; it's the foreign policy, stupid.'"^[@calomiris2000] In other words,
the Meltzer Report had attempted to give reforms that were reasonable
economically, but believed the report was rejected because of conflicting goals
for foreign policy. Also of note here is the former chief economist and senior
vice president of the World Bank, Joseph Stiglitz, who was likely the most
prominent critic of the IMF's policies during this era.^[See @stiglitz2003 as
cited above, but also @stiglitz2000; @stiglitz2001a; and @stiglitz2001b.]
Stiglitz's criticisms were similarly met with unpopularity among some.^[An
interesting note is that Stiglitz had serious competition at the time with
then-U.S. Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers over this position, even
contending that Summers prevented him from being re-appointed to Stiglitz' World
Bank position in 1999. Lawrence Summers would of course then go on to be
President of Harvard University before being kicked out for his conflict with
the legendary Cornel West, sexist rants on the underrepresentation of women in
STEM, ties to Jeffrey Epstein, and paying a professor's $28.5M lawsuit.]

Critics like Stiglitz of this second group often defend globalization and the
core goals of the IMF even while critizing some of its enforcers, arguing that
there simply must be a return to the IMF's roots to make globalization work for
everyone. In contrast, the third group of writers on the IMF take issue not only
with the IMF's implementations of its mandate but also the conceptual grounding
on which these programs are made.^[@cliftIMFPoliticsAusterity2018;
@leeThineOwnselfBe2003a; @mccleeryWashingtonConsensusPostmortem2008; @jeon2014;
@muellerIMFNeoliberalismHegemony2011; @mueller2010;
@rileyPoliticsGlobalDebt2016;@sargentDebtEntanglementsWars2019; @stuelke2021]
These writers recognize that the IMF's economic motivations are political ones,
which often derive from extended and recapitulated colonial relationships. Julie
Mueller of this group is most explicit in this approach, advocating for a
neo-Gramscian approach that analyzes both the IMF's policies and the conditions
leading to consent to these policies in recipient countries. She contends that
the success of the IMF to convince the world its fundamental form of
intervention is necessary, along with the gigantic coffers to support its
policies, have constituted a new world hegemon.

I hope to join this third group of writers, and extend their discussion with the
discussion of raciality as co-constitutive to the logic of financial capital.
With solely an economic focus on the IMF's policies, we are left with the fairly
obvious contention that the programs benefit some but leave others behind. But
this statement is not new, and even one that the IMF would likely agree with.
Given the organization openly advocated for "labor market flexibility" in the
Asian financial crisis, the IMF seemed to have thought some would receive for
the worse end of its policies in exchange for the greater good of economic
progression. A historical, cultural, and conceptual perspective of of the IMF
must be undertaken to understand the impact of this uneven development. This
includes linking the history of the IMF's responses and economic crises to the
history of empire, and analyzing the social categories that the IMF uses and
reinforces.

### Korean history

Both of these items can be seen through an incorporation of Korea's historical
trajectory and relationship with the United States.

Historians of colonial Korea today include Theodore Jun Yoo, Todd Henry, Gi-Wook
Shin, David Fedman, and many others. Rather than focusing on establishing a
chronological history of Korea under Japanese rule, these historians focus on
specific epistemelogical and social categories that are regulated by the
Japanese state and contested by native Koreans. On questions of land, to
cosmopolitan space, to gender and sexuality, the Japanese government put forth
formal and informal regulations, and in response Koreans would rebel through
moments like the March First Movement, through guerilla fighting in the Korean
mountains, or by striking in Japanese-Korean factories.^[@henry2020; @shin2014;
@shin1999; @yoo2008; @fedman2020; @henry2016].

After the ending of Japanese colonization, Korea was unilaterally split in two
by the United States. The divide was infamously drawn by two army officials, who
had little knowledge of Korea besides a National Geographic map that they used
to draw the section of Korea they wanted to keep from the Soviet Union. This
began the period of violence that would later develop into the Korean War, which
would end with an armistice signed between China, the United Nations as led by
the United States, and North Korea in 1953. Korea would see a horrific scale of
violence during this time, with more bombing than in the entire Pacific Theater
during World War II. This along with the fact that the war had no clear
beginning or ending, that this war quickly became known in the U.S. as "the
forgotten war," and the fact that this served as the first period of bloodshed
for the U.S.' battle against communism, have served as the motivation for many
historians' work.^[@fehrenbach2000; @fehrenbach2000; @stone2014, @sandler2014]
Critical histories of the Korean War begin with Bruce Cumings' _Origins of the
Korean War_, and today include also Grace Cho's _The Haunting of the Korean
Diaspora_, a collection of works in _positions: east asia critique_ titled _the
unending korean war_ and led by Christine Hong, Monica Kim's _The Interrogation
Rooms of the Korean War_, and Daniel Kim's _The Intimacies of
Conflict_.^[@cho2008; @cumings1981; @hong2015; @kim2020a; @kim2020] Cumings
serves as a foundation here, showing in his 1981 text _The Origins of the Korean
War_ that the United States military effectively began the Korean War with the
arbitrary separation of the nation in 1945 and the numerous massacres and
concentration camps set up by the US-backed Syngman Rhee regime in Korea between
1945 and 1950. The more modern works continue this attempt to push back on the
U.S. periodization of the war as a conflict from 1950 to 1953, describing how
the violence extended before and much beyond these years.

They also position the conflict and U.S. intervention as the beginning of a
turbulent era of U.S.-backed military dictatorships, beginning with Syngman
Rhee's appointment by the U.S. army in 1945, lasting until the 1987
democratization of Korea. Charles Kim, Seungsook Moon, Paul Chang, Namhee Lee,
and many others have written on South Korea during this period, documenting the
intellectual and cultural trends that fueled resistance in these
regimes.^[@chang2015; @kim2017; @lee2011; @woo2019] Of particular note is the
_minjung_ movement, or perhaps "movement of the masses," a student and
intellectual movement seeking to reclaim Korean history as that of victimhood to
that of agency. Other writing on organizing in Korea extends Namhee Lee's
writing on this.^[@em2013; @kang2010; @choiDiscourseDecolonizationPopular1997;
@choo2016]

In summary, recent trends in histories of Korea have turned away from uncovering
an objective truth as a first generation of U.S. scholars had, but towards more
explicitly critiquing and deconstructing social categories in Korea's
history.^[This is not at all to incriminate the first generation of scholars as
being unnuanced or incorrect; histories like Cumings' that exposed what military
aggression and popular narratives hid are of course essential, and themselves
unpacked ideology and culture as well.] However, much of this perspective is
lacking for the economy of Korea in a global context, and the IMF crisis in
Korea. The majority of works in this field that analyze Korea's place in the
crisis are aligned with the perspective of the IMF, indicting the "crony
capitalism" of Korean _chaebol_ groups without acknowledging any of the
financial conditions that led to the crisis, the intervention that exacerbated
it, or the logic that drove the intervention. Some exceptions here are writing
from Jesook Song on the welfare state during the crisis, and several works from
film studies, from Joseph Jonghyun Jeon, Jinying Li, and David
Martin-Jones.^[@song2007; @jeon2014; @jeon2019; @li2009; @martin-jones2007]

## Conclusion

As stated throughout this paper, the racial logic or hierarchy through which the
IMF and loan recipient countries relate to each other is little discussed.
Scholars that lay the theoretical foundation for this work, like Ferreira da
Silva and Chakravartty, stop short at approaching the global scale. Conversely,
studies of contemporary capitalism at the global scale do not discuss the
epistemelogical and social grounding to complement their economic analysis.
Studies of the IMF in particular neglect this conceptual footing, to the effect
of crticizing the IMF but leaving out the hierarchy it serves to create.

South Korea during the IMF crisis offers a case study for showing how this
racial logic operates. As the historians in the previous sections have written
to great lengths on, Korea's destruction during the Korean War and subsequent
rebuilding by the endorsed actors of the U.S. empire suggest that the state
today was built through imperial violence. This is embodied today through a sort
of "model modernity" status of postindustrial success.^[While the term "model
modernity" was said to me by Professor Lowe as a conversational, on-the-spot
insight during an advising meeting, I believe others have deployed this term as
well -- specifically @lye1999; but also @chettri2020 and @wilks2008.] Like the
much-discussed myth of Asian Americans as a "model minority" in the U.S., that
status connotes a group that has endured hardship but ultimately has played by
the (Western) rules of capitalist success to achieve some semblance of
"prosperity" today. Not only does this rely on a false notion of prosperity, for
neither the "model minority" Asian Americans nor the "model modernity" of South
Korea are liberated from colonialism today, but the status also hides how the
logic that led to the "success" of certain groups perpetuates the oppression of
others.

I hope to elaborate on this in my paper, showing how the status of Korea relates
to other countries' placement in the capitalist world-system. For instance, the
status of "model modernity," produced by the racial project of empire, might
reinforce the global racial hierarchy by allowing the IMF to castigate others
that do not achieve the same level of economic "success." This discussion will
require both a global focus, as the dependency and world-systems analysts offer,
and a corresponding theoretical discussion of the co-constitution of race and
capital that Chakravartty, Ferreira da Silva, and others bring.

\newpage

## Bibliography
