---
title: "IMF Press Release: December 4th, 1997"
subtitle: Primary source analysis
author: Nathan Kim
indent: true
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{hyperref}
  - \usepackage{setspace}
  - \onehalfspacing
  - \newfontfamily\myregularfont{EB Garamond}
  - \newfontfamily\koreanfont{Noto Serif CJK KR SemiBold}
  - \usepackage[CJK]{ucharclasses}
  - \setTransitionsForCJK{\koreanfont}{\myregularfont}
---

\centerline{
\href{yhttps://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2015/09/14/01/49/pr9755}{Link
to source} }

# Background

After neoliberal financial reforms in the 1980s and early
1990s, the U.S. dollar enjoyed a strong position relative to
other global currencies. Although the economy suffered a
short-term setback in the early 1990s, the resulting bailout
measures by Treasury Secretary Alan Greenspan raised U.S.
interest rates and made the U.S. even more of an attractive
investment opportunity for foreigners. This was especially so
compared to the previous "hot" investment opportunities in
Southeast Asia, that had similarly relied on raised interest
rates to attract investment. Southeast Asian currencies were
pegged to the U.S. dollar, meaning that the growth in value of
the U.S. dollar made their own currencies more valuable, and
thus their exports more expensive.

This reached a tipping point in July 2nd, 1997, when the Thai
government made the decision to abandon the peg to the U.S.
dollar and cut off the cause of this economic slowdown.
Unfortunately, the abandonment of this peg (some call this
event the "float" of the Thai baht) led to foreign withdrawal
of investment and thus massive devaluation of the baht, leading
to a chain reaction of financial events like the closure of
banks, mass layoffs, and the migration of workers back to their
homes from the previously job-rich cities. This reaction led to
crises in many other countries, the most infamous of which took
place in Indonesia and South Korea.

The chain reaction came to Korea a few months later. Foreign
investment in general, to the tune of some $100 billion
borrowed in that year alone, began pulling out rapidly in Korea
after worries of financial instability across Asia. Given many
Korean firms had borrowed what they could not pay back, foreign
confidence in Korea quickly fell and investors withdrew more
money, beginning a cycle that would escalate into crisis. This
reached its peak in November 1997 as the _chaebol_^[Family-run
large conglomerate. Sort of the like the Murdoch family and Fox
News.] Daewoo collapsed, car company Kia Motors was bought by
Hyundai Motors, and the stock exchange fell twenty percent that
month after speculation that restrictions tied to the IMF
bailout would worsen the crisis. By the end of that year,
Korean currency was devalued by around fifty percent,
unemployment tripled to around seven percent, and the
government even began a campaign of collecting gold from its
citizens to inject value into the federal coffers.

After two weeks of negotiations in November 1997, the IMF
reached a bailout agreement with the Korean government. In
exchange for a $21 billion loan, the Korean government agreed
to structural and financial sector loans that would result in
the loss of employment for millions, the mass closure of
companies, and a renewed financial dependence on foreign (U.S.)
investment. These developments would launch Korea into the "IMF
era" over the next five years and would shape its course of
development for the decades after.

**My analysis focuses on the IMF's December 4th, 1997 press
release that first introduced these reforms to the public.** I
will first summarize the contents of the press release, which
is titled "IMF Approves SDR 15.5 Billion Stand-by Credit for
Korea." I will then read it "against the grain" to see how
arguments like these contributed to the financial dependence of
Korea on the U.S. as well as the IMF's logic or grammar of
financial order. Lastly, I will discuss what is not in the text
-- what reforms or protections were not noted in the press
release, and what questions the press release raises that may
be answered by other resources that my thesis will discuss.

# The reforms

This section is a brief overview of the press releases'
content: the structural adjustment program in the IMF's own
words.

"The centerpiece of the governmentâ€™s program is a comprehensive
restructuring and strengthening of the financial system to make
it sound, transparent, and more efficient." So sayeth the IMF
in this press release, in its introduction to the reforms of
Korea's financial sector. These reforms entailed the immediate
suspension of nine financial institutions, and their closure if
they did not submit "appropriate restructuring plans." With the
euphemistic caveat that it would "entail losses to
shareholders," the IMF also warned here that many financial
institutions of all kinds would be subject to mergers and
acquisitions as from both domestic and foreign investors. The
IMF conclues this section with a standalone paragraph stating
simply that "to promote competition and efficiency in the
financial sector, the authorities will allow foreigners to
establish bank subsidiaries and brokerage houses by mid-1998."

Besides reforms specifically for the financial sector, the IMF
also prescribed general structural reforms. These all center
around a program of economic "liberalization" that mainly
involved opening the country for foreign investment. The
ceiling on foreign ownership in Korean equities and listed
Korean shares would be raised from 7 percent and 26 percent to
fifty percent by the end of 1997, which would entail quite a
dramatic shift considering this agreement was finalized at the
beginning of December 1997.^[Fifty percent sounds ridiculous to
me, but even crazier is that the ceiling on foreign investment
in listed shares would actually be removed by the Korean
government altogether in 1998. I haven't been able to find data
on if the proportion of foreign investment even approached any
of these limits, but the fact that the Korean government saw it
fit and useful to raise the limits indicates that a very high
proportion of foreign investment was desired.] Besides these
general ceiling adjustments, other major barriers to foreign
investment were also modified, including foreign access to
domestic money market instruments^[For reference, money market
instruments are short-term loans, typically to bridge two
payments. A company might use this kind of device if they had
to pay a supplier one week to make a product but would only
receive customer payment for that product in the next week
after.], foreign access to corporate bonds, and general
simplification of approval procedures.

The actual financing that the IMF agreed upon was a package of
$21 billion, along with promises for loans from the World
Bank^[For reference, the World Bank is typically a fund
generating general-purpose and development loans, while the
IMF's funds are used specifically for short-term crises.] of
$10 billion, from the Asian Development Bank for $4 billion,
from several Western countries for a total of $20 billion.
These Western countries specifically were Australia, Belgium,
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States.^[It is
strange that every one of these nations besides Switzerland was
at one point an imperial power. Even Switzerland profited from
informal engagements and mercenary contracts, which is quite a
contradiction to their current nonviolent image. Perhaps points
to discuss in the actual thesis.] The main payment of $21
billion was distributed in stages, with $5.56 billion available
available at the time of agreement, $2.6 billion available
after the first review on December 18th, $2 billion after the
January 8th review, and the rest being available after "the
attainment of performance targets." All of this comprised some
1,939% of Korea's yearly contribution to the IMF.

# Dependence

Perhaps the most dangerous argument the IMF drives forth here
relates to foreign investors and their role in the crisis. The
IMF's biggest indictment in this press release are corrupt and
harmful banking practices in South Korea, that stem from a
"legacy of intervention" from the Korean government. According
to the IMF, these practices led to the shuttering of several
large corporations like Kia Motors and Hanbo Steel, and brought
the crisis to Korea.

Without defending the Korean mega-corporations that the IMF
criticized, I want to note the relationships and events that
led to the shuttering of these _chaebol_ groups. Nowhere in the
IMF's discussion is the culprit of the U.S. dollar as the "peg"
or the currency from which all other currencies derived value.
This relationship forced the inflation of currencies across
Southeast Asia and kickstarted the Asian financial crisis after
the inflated currencies made it difficult for Southeast Asian
exports to be sold.^[Korea had actually also used the U.S.
dollar as its peg, which became a problem during the crisis as
the continued growth of the dollar made Korean exports more
expensive and thus fall in the international market. Korea took
the _won_ off of the peg in December 1997, which resulted in
the immediate devaluation of the _won_ by 50% and deepened the
already-severe financial scare. But this happened after this
press release was published, so it is left here to a footnote.]
More broadly speaking, the IMF ignores the issue of foreign
dependence that led to the crisis in Korea, or in other words
the rapid withdrawal of foreign investment throughout 1997 as
discussed above. Why should the loss of foreign "confidence"
result in the closure of keystone Korean companies? In the
press release, this question is presumed to have been answered
and justified; the logic of foreign dependence as part of the
financial machine is a given, not something that demands
explanation.

This assumed invisibility of parasitic foreign dependence as
the _cause_ of the crisis is necessary for the IMF to prescribe
parasitic foreign dependence as the _solution_ to the crisis.
Firstly, the $21 billion promised by the IMF was given with an
interest rate three times higher than standard IMF or World
Bank loans [ wording] But much more consequential than the loan
itself in establishing dependency was in the IMF's structural
adjustment program for Korea. The $21 billion promised by the
IMF is indeed a large amount of money, but to the IMF the
greatest savior to Korea would not be this loan itself but the
structural adjustment program's opening of Korea to even
greater foreign investment, which would inject several times
the amount of the IMF loan package into the Korean economy.
Besides foreign investment itself, the IMF also permitted
foreign ownership, mergers and acquisitions, and the creation
of brokerage houses in Korea that heightened the U.S. hand in
the Korean economy.

Importantly, the IMF's goal of bringing an "early return of
[foreign] confidence" in the Korean market is stated without
justification. As with the absolution of foreign actions in the
cause of the crisis, foreign "confidence" (investment) in the
Korean market as a solution for the crisis is presumed instead
of justified or explained. The justification for these
processes comes in the crisis itself -- when millions of lives
are on the line, the most immediate solution of quick foreign
aid becomes the most feasible solution compared to questioning
how foreign intervention led to the crisis in the first place.
Thus, even though the terms of the IMF bailout led to mass
rallies and criticism at the time of the negotiation, in the
end the IMF's terms sheet was ratified and even extended by the
leaders of the Korean government.^[@chossudovsky2000;
@leeThineOwnselfBe2003a; @medley2000; @strom1998;
@weisbrot1998]

In sum, instead of promoting independence and sovereignty from
foreign aid, the IMF's programs are focused on the exact
opposite of ensuring Third World countries are bound to depend
on the West for financial security and stability. It is able to
do so not only through simple loan packages, but far more
consequentially through first ignoring the relationship to
Western investment these countries already had that contributed
to the crisis in the first place, and then prescribing even
more dependence through restructuring of entire economies. In
this way the IMF serves as a small but powerful engine,
striking at times of crisis to ensure the world depends on a
few financial powers.^[I also want to noted the nominal
connection to the dependency theory of Hans Singer, Raul
Prebisch, Walter Rodney, and many others, but after some
research think it might take some work and additional
historical background to apply its central claims to late-90s
Korea. Korea at this time was not a country deprived of
economic resources and deeply entrenched in poverty, or a
country that had its natural resources extracted by First World
countries. Its dependence on former colonial powers is to be
sure economic, but it is harder to say that this dependence is
material (as dependency theory canonically discusses) given
that much of it was based on financial loans. A point to be
fleshed out in detail in my thesis. See @prebisch1962;
@rodney2018; @singer1949.]

# The IMF world-system

Financial dependency is half of the IMF's goal. To uncover the
rest, let us examine one euphemism from this press release. The
IMF states that "to facilitate the ability of the Korean labor
market to respond to changing economic conditions, labor market
flexibility will be enhanced by easing dismissal restrictions
under mergers and acquisitions." The language suggests the
order of the IMF's priorities: the most important objective of
the IMF is to protect the Korean market, and under this goal
the layoffs of potentially millions of people just serves the
greater good. Layoffs are described as "labor market
flexibility," as if to suggest that the tripling of the
unemployment rate in this period could even be a good thing --
that's just the economy being "flexible."

In addition to being a horrifying description as it is, this
sleight of hand illustrates the broader goal of the IMF that I
hope to illustrate in my thesis. The IMF's priorities aren't to
protect the most vulnerable, but to protect the logic of a
unified, global financial system that has as its center the
West and the U.S. Instead of using the interregnum of financial
crises to lift those out of inequality or prevent catastrophe,
the IMF uses these crises to place every country into its own
perfect spot in this order. More important than people, and
perhaps even more important than money itself is this financial
logic that makes the world go round.^[In the end it really is
all about money, so I don't want to discard the logic as being
more important than money itself. But money can sometimes take
a hit so that logic can pull the rest of wagon forward. In the
case of the Asian financial crisis, for example, the IMF has
noted that many investors actually lost money in the recovery
process. But with the establishment of dependency and an
integration into the global financial order, the West can
recoup its investment in the neo-colony of Korea. Money can
only be made when the logic to do so is secure.] In this press
release in particular, more important than the layoffs of
millions is the abstract idea that these layoffs are subsumed
into, that "labor market flexibility be enhanced."

Just as the IMF simultaneously ignores and pushes for foreign
dependence, so too does the IMF "ignore" (or rather, presume)
this logic and simultaneously pushes this logic forward. This
logic isn't something that needs to be clarified or laid out in
transparent detail in order to be "valid"; documents like this
press release can drive the IMF's arguments forward simply with
the authorial tone of objectivity. The IMF's arguments are
valid because they are stated as if they were valid -- leaving
out gigantic holes like of the issue of foreign dependence as
the cause of crisis, as explained above.

The result of the logic is a global financial order, or as
Immanuel Wallerstein might argue the capitalist
world-system.^[@wallerstein1974, @grosfoguel2002;
@grosfoguel2006] "Periphery" countries like Korea must depend
on "core" countries like the United States, in an ultimately
parasitic relationship that reifies the position of "core"
countries as leaders of the world-system. This world-system is
composed of relationships of financial dependence, but even
before these relationships are begun this world-system requires
an epistemological backbone to grow from. That backbone
produces and is fulfilled by discursive products like this
press release and material products like its billions of
dollars in distributed loans.

# Beyond this

The press release still leaves many questions to be answered,
partially because it was published at the beginning of Korea's
journey through the crisis and also because of its official,
high-level view of the crisis. Some of them are:

- How might the IMF have used Korea to position other countries
  in the IMF's world-system in the years after?
- How was the world-system resisted or refused by Korea and
  Korean workers?
- How did relations of dependency affect social structures in
  Korea?

I hope that further resources can help me answer these
questions, and ultimately help me turn towards not only the
IMF's financial logic but its racial logic.

\pagebreak

\centerline{Bibliography}
